In this section, we first set the context and state the
assumptions that are adopted in this paper. We then
discuss the k-dominant skyline problems. Assume there
is an n-dimensional dataset DB and D1, D2, · · ·, Dn
be the n attributes of DB. Let O1, O2, · · ·, Or be r
objects (tuples) of DB. We use Oi.Dj to denote the j-th
dimension value of Oi.
A. k-dominance
An object Oi is said to dominate another object Oj ,
which we denote as Oi ? Oj , if Oi:Ds ? Oj:Ds for
all dimensions (s = 1; · · · ; n) and Oi:Dt < Oj:Dt for
at least one dimension (1 ? t ? n). We call such Oi
as dominant object and such Oj as dominated object
between Oi and Oj .
On the other hand, an object Oi is said to k-
dominate another object Oj , denoted as Oi ?k Oj , if
Oi:Ds ? Oj:Ds in k dimensions among n dimensions
and Oi:Dt < Oj:Dt in one dimension among the k
dimensions. We call such Oi as k-dominant object and
such Oj as k-dominated object between Oi and Oj .
An object Oi is said to have -domination power if
there are  dimensions in which Oi is better than or equal
to all other objects of DB.
B. k-dominant Skyline
An object Oi ? DB is said to be a k-dominant skyline
object of DB if Oi is not k-dominated by any other object
in DB. We denote a set of all k-dominant skyline objects
in DB as Skyk(DB).
Theorem: Every object that belongs to the k-dominant
skyline also belongs to the skyline, i.e., Skyk(DB) ?
Skyn(DB).
Proof: Let O1 ? Skyk(DB) and O1 =? Skyn(DB).
It follows that there is an another object O2 that n-
dominates the objects O1. Based on the definition of
skyline ?Dk(k = 1; · · · ; n): O2:Dk ? O1:Dk. Therefore,
based on the k-dominant skyline definition we find that
O1 =? Skyk(DB), which leads to a contradiction. ?
IV. TWO SCAN ALGORITHM WITH DOMINATION
POWER INDEX (TSADPI)
We use a filter based algorithm to compute Skyk(DB)
efficiently. It has two parts: one is sorting by domination
power and the other is k-dominant skyline calculation.
A. Sort by Domination Power Index
By using ordered objects we can eliminate some of
non-skyline objects easily. To get the benefit of ordered
objects Chan, et al. sort the whole objects with a monotonic
scoring function sum in their OSA algorithm for k-
dominant query [6]. However, this sort is not effective for
k-dominant query computation, especially, when values
of each attribute is not normalized. For example, assume
Oi = (1; 2; 3; 3; 3; 2) and Oj = (7; 1; 3; 2; 3; 1) are two
objects in 6-dimensional space. Although sum of Oi’s
values is smaller than that of Oj ’s, Oi does not 5-
dominant of Oj . Instead, Oi is 5-dominated by Oj .
To prune unnecessary objects efficiently in the k-
dominant skyline computation, we compute domination
power of each object. Algorithm 1 represents the domination
power calculation procedure. An object is said to
have -domination power if there are  minimal values
in which it is better or equal to all other objects of DB.
We sort objects in descending order by their values of
domination power (). If more than one objects have the
same domination power then sort those objects in ascending
order of the sum value. This order reflects how likely
to k-dominate other objects. Higher objects in the sorted
sequence are likely to dominate other objects. Thus this
preprocessing helps to reduce the computational cost of k-
dominant skyline. Experiments show that our estimation is
robust over various distributions. Moreover, it also works
well when data values are correlated, independent or anticorrelated.
Table II is the example of sorted dataset of Table I. In
the sorted dataset, object O7 has the highest domination
power 4. Note that object O7 dominates all objects lie
below it in four attributes, D1;D2;D5, and D6.
B. k-dominant Skyline Calculation
To confirm whether an object O is k-dominant or not,
we need to compare it against all skyline objects. This is
because O can be k-dominated by some skyline objects
even though O is not k-dominated by any of the k-
dominant objects. To eliminate non-k-dominant skyline
objects, one set of objects are maintained as Skyk(DB).
Our algorithm needs two scans for k-dominant skyline
computation. The dataset sorted by domination power can
reduce the pairwise comparison between the objects of
Skyk(DB) and DB. Algorithm 2 shows our Two Scan
Algorithm with Domination Power Index approach.
Table III represents the first scan comparison between
TSA and TSADPI method to compute 5-dominant skyline.
Columns 1, 2, and 3 represent the sorted DB,
Sky5(DB) and no. of pairwise comparisons respectively
during the first scan of TSA and column 4, 5, and 6 are
those of TSADPI. Initially Sky5(DB) is empty and O5
is added in Sky5(DB) as a 5-dominant object without
any comparison. Since O5 and O7 fails to become 5-
dominant of each other, after one comparison O7 is added
in Sky5(DB). Next after two comparisons we can see
that O2 is not in Sky5(DB). In this way objects O4, O3,
O6, and O1 need 2, 1, 2, and 2 comparisons respectively.
At the end of the first scan Sky5(DB) = {O5;O7}. From
Table III we can see that TSADPI method needs only 6
comparisons while TSA needs 10.
To eliminate the false positives produced by the first
scan, a second scan is necessary. To determine whether
an object O ? Skyk(DB) is indeed k-dominant, it is
sufficient to compare O against DB - Skyk(DB). If
the number of false positives produced by the first scan
is small, the performance of the second scan as well
as the overall Two-Scan approach will be better. After
the completion of second scan both of the methods give
the result Sky5(DB) = {O7;O5}. Like this example the
result of TSA and TSADPI will be the same for any
general dataset. This is because TSADPI follows the same
TWO-Scan procedure like TSA. The first scan is for
candidate k-dominant skyline computation and the second
scan is to check the false positive cases. However, it could
avoid successfully many unnecessary comparison between
the candidate k-dominant skyline and the dataset.