WITH the large number of transactions which are
recorded and stored by many organizations, the
importance of being able to analyze trends in fast data
streams has become very important in recent years.
Typically, such databases are created by continuous activity
over long periods of time, and are therefore databases
which grow without limit. For example, even simple
transactions of everyday life, such as paying by credit card
or using the telephone, are recorded in an automated way
using current hardware technology. The volume of such
transactions may easily range in the millions on a daily
basis. Often, the data may show important changes in the
trends over time because of fundamental changes in the
underlying phenomena. This process is referred to as data
evolution. By understanding the nature of such changes, a
user may be able to glean valuable insights into emerging
trends in the underlying transactional or spatial activity.
Therefore, it is useful to develop tools and techniques which
would provide a visual and diagnostic overview of the key
characteristics in the data which have changed over time in
a fast and user-friendly way.
The problem of mining high-speed data streams has
been recognized to be an important one in recent years [5],
[6], [11], [12], [23]. There is a considerable amount of work
in the literature with a focus on incremental maintenance of
models in the context of evolving data [2], [4], [12], [10],
[13], [17], [20]. Some recent work has discussed new
methods for data mining problems such as clustering and
classification [2], [3], [4], [16], [20], [24] in the context of
evolving data streams. There has also been considerable
work on evolving data in the field of statistics and control
theory [8]. Some recent work [14], [15] has also discussed a
general framework for quantifying the changes in evolving
data characteristics in the context of several data mining
problems and algorithms. The focus of our paper is
different from and orthogonal to the work in [14], [15].
Specifically, the work in [14], [15] is focused on the effects of
evolution on data mining models and algorithms. This
paper studies the problem of evolution in terms of understanding
the nature of the data changes as opposed to finding
whether a particular data mining model has become stale or
not because of the underlying change. As we shall see, such
a study of evolution provides the user with a considerable
understanding of the changes more directly in terms of the
data attributes. Other recent work [5], [9] discusses the
problem of change detection and visualization for particular
domains of data.
Since a data stream typically contains a large volume of
high-dimensional information, it is useful to characterize
the underlying changes in a fast and user-friendly way. For
example, what are the locations in the stream which show
the greatest amount of change? How can the change be
characterized in a way which is intuitively appealing to a
user? This paper provides the user a generic tool to
understand, visualize, and diagnose the summary changes
in data characteristics. This includes methods to visualize
how the pattern of the data in various spatial locations has
changed over time, or which combinations of dimensions
show the greatest amount of change. We also discuss ways
of providing specific diagnosis of localized phenomena in
different spatial regions of the data. A concrete quantification
of the change at a given location is suggested, and this
quantification is used in order to determine which
combinations of dimensions illustrate the greatest amount
of evolution.
There are several interesting applications of change
diagnosis in evolving data streams. For example, in a
supermarket or electronic commerce application, a stream
of customer requests may consist of demographic or
customer buying behavior attributes. It may often be
desirable to pick those combinations of attributes in which
there is large change in the level of transactional activity.
For example, when a particular group of products shows a
large change in the level of transactional activity, it may be
desirable to use this fact for sales promotions. The ability to
track such information is a clear competitive advantage for
a business, which can use it in order to anticipate and adapt
to potential customers in the near future. For instance, if
recent data shows an increasing trend in the number of
customers with a certain combination of demographic
characteristics, then the supermarket can anticipate the
increased demands of the items usually bought by this
group. Another example is a network application in which
the packets over a large network may be be monitored for
sudden changes in patterns. Such changes could correspond
to significant events on the network, such as the
activities or presence of a new group of users. The process
of detecting change in data streams can thus be useful in a
number of surveillance applications.
When the data stream shows a high level of evolution, it
is expected that the relative data concentrations at various
spatial locations may change over time. We will capture
such changes with the concept of velocity density, which
measures the rate of change of data concentration at a given
spatial location over a user-defined time horizon. This
density can be used in order to create two kinds of visual
profiles of data evolution: the temporal velocity profiles and
spatial velocity profiles. These profiles provide different
perspectives on the nature of the underlying change. Since
the results of this paper are relevant to high-dimensional
data mining problems as well, it is important to provide
diagnosis capability for such cases. In order to deal with this
class of problems effectively, we use velocity density
estimation in order to pick the projections from highdimensional
data in which the greatest changes in data
characteristics have occurred. Such combinations of dimensions
are very interesting, because it may often happen that
there may be very little evolution in terms of either the
entire set of dimensions or individual dimensions; yet some
particular combinations of dimensions may show huge
levels of evolution because of changes in the correlation
structure of the data. A closely related problem is that of
mining spatiotemporal or mobile data [21], [22], for which it
is useful to have the ability to diagnose aggregate changes
in spatial characteristics over time. The results of this paper
are equally valuable for providing such understanding.
Since data streams are fast and continuous over long
periods of time, the data may quickly become stale for timesensitive
applications. In such cases, the usefulness of the
evolution monitoring process also becomes time-critical. In
order to achieve this goal, we mine the data streams in an
online fashion; therefore, most techniques discussed in the
paper need to examine a data point only once throughout
the entire computation. To this effect, we discuss algorithms
for change detection in data streams, whose computational
requirement per record in the stream are constant.
Furthermore, these algorithms do not require any rescanning
of the data. This is the most optimistic case that can be
achieved by any algorithm for mining data streams.
This paper is organized as follows: In the remainder of
this section, we formalize the contributions of this paper
and provide a brief overview of some concepts from kernel
density estimation which we will need in this paper. In
Section 2, we will introduce the velocity density estimation
technique and show how to use it in order to construct the
temporal velocity profile. We will also discuss how the
temporal velocity profiles can be used in order to generate
the spatial velocity profiles. These profiles can be used in
order to provide a visual understanding of the spatial reorganization
of the data. Extensions to high-dimensional
data are discussed in Section 3. In Section 4, we discuss how
the temporal and spatial profiles may be used to provide a
more concrete diagnosis of the emerging trends in localized
regions. In Section 5, we present the empirical results which
show interesting evolution behavior for different data sets.
We also show the performance efficiency of the technique.
The conclusion and summary are presented in Section 6.