In this section, we evaluate our PISCES on PlanetLab[2], an
open platform for deploying distributed systems. 256 nodes are
selected from different continents in the world. We test our system
in different network configurations to demonstrate its flexibility and
scalability. And the results show that PISCES outperforms the full
indexing scheme significantly, especially in the case of large data
size, high update rate and high churn rate.
To simulate the real data, TPC-H[4] generator is used to generate
data for the nodes. TPC-H is a decision support benchmark, and its
schema is shown in Figure 8. Specifically, the following query is
used as the test query:
SELECT sum(TOTALPRICE) as totalSales
FROM ORDERS
WHERE TOTALPRICE>x and TOTALPRICE<y
The tuples in ORDERS table are grouped according to the SUPPKEY
of LINEITEM (this is done by joining the ORDERS and
LINEITEM tables and grouping tuples by SUPPKEY). Then the
orders for the same SUPPKEY is disseminated to the same node,
which simulates the real scenario. Each node is assigned between
1k to 10k tuples. Every experiment is run for one hour (the network
initialization time is not included). The queries with selectivity of
0.01 are generated based on the Zipfian distribution with θ ranging
from 0.4 (mildly skewed) to 1.4 (highly skewed). This allows us
to evaluate the performance of PISCES under the conditions when
there are some popular data in the dataset and the query distribution
changes after a time interval.
The above table lists default configuration of the experiments.
We use CAN-PISCES,CAN-FULL, BATON-PISCES and BATONFULL
to denote the PISCES in CAN, full indexing scheme in CAN,
PISCES in BATON and full indexing scheme in BATON respectively.
We count the total number of messages each node received
in an experiment, including query messages and index maintenance
messages (including index messages caused by node joining or
leaving to create/delete new/old indexes, migration of indexes, etc).
Then, the average message number in a minute (per node) is used
as our main performance metrics.