When an overload is detected as a result of static or dynamic analysis, Aurora attempts to reduce the volume of Aurora tuple processing via load shedding. The naive approach to load shedding involves dropping tuples at random points in the network in an entirely uncontrolled manner. This is similar to dropping overflow packets in packet-switching networks [27], and has two potential problems: (1) overall system utility might be degraded more than necessary; and (2) application semantics might be arbitrarily affected. In order to alleviate these problems, Aurora relies on QoS information to guide the load shedding process. We now describe two load-shedding techniques that differ in the way they exploit QoS.
Load Shedding by Dropping Tuples. The first approach addresses the former problem mentioned above: it attempts to minimize the degradation (or maximize the improvement) in the overall system QoS; i.e., the QoS values aggregated over all the outputs. This is accomplished by dropping tuples on network branches that terminate in more tolerant outputs.
If load shedding is triggered as a result of static analysis, then we cannot expect to use delay-based or value-based QoS information (without assuming the availability of a priori knowledge of the tuple delays or frequency distribution of values). On the other hand, if load shedding is triggered as a result of dynamic analysis, we can also use delay-based QoS graphs
We use a greedy algorithm to perform load shedding. Let us initially describe the static load shedding algorithm driven by drop-based QoS graphs. We first identify the output with the smallest negative slope for the corresponding QoS graph. We move horizontally along this curve until there is another output whose QoS curve has a smaller negative slope at that point. This horizontal difference gives us an indication of the output tuples to drop (i.e., the selectivity of the drop box to be inserted) that would result in the minimum decrease in the overall QoS. We then move the corresponding drop box as far upstream as possible until we find a box that affects other outputs (i.e., a split point), and place the drop box at this point. Meanwhile, we can calculate the amount of recovered resources. If the system resources are still not sufficient, then we repeat the process.
For the run-time case, the algorithm is similar except that we can use delay-based QoS graphs to identify the problematic outputs, i.e., the ones that are beyond their delay thresholds, and we repeat the load shedding process until the latency goals are met
In general, there are two subtleties in dynamic load shedding. First, drop boxes inserted by the load shedder should be among the ones that are given higher priority by the scheduler. Otherwise, load shedding will be ineffective in reducing the load of the system. Therefore, the load shedder simply does not consider the inactive (i.e., low priority) outputs, which are indicated by the scheduler. Secondly, the algorithm tries to move the drop boxes as close to the sources as possible to discard tuples before they redundantly consume any resources. On the other hand, if there is a box with a large existing queue, it makes sense to temporarily insert the drop box at that point rather than trying to move it upstream closer towards the data sources.
Presumably, the application is coded so that it can tolerate missing tuples from a data source caused by communication failures or other problems. Hence, load shedding simply artificially introduces additional missing tuples. Although the semantics of the application are somewhat different, the harm should not be too damaging.
Semantic Load Shedding by Filtering Tuples. The load shedding scheme described above effectively reduces the amount of Aurora processing by dropping randomly selected tuples at strategic points in the network. While this
approach attempts to minimize the loss in overall system utility, it fails to control the impact of the dropped tuples on application semantics. Semantic load shedding addresses this limitation by using value-based QoS information, if available. Specifically, semantic load shedding drops tuples in a more controlled way; i.e., it drops less important tuples, rather than random ones, using filters.
If value-based QoS information is available, then Aurora can watch each output and build up a histogram containing the frequency with which value ranges have been observed. In addition, Aurora can calculate the expected utility of a range of outputs by multiplying the QoS values with the corresponding frequency values for every interval and then summing these values. To shed load, Aurora identifies the output with the lowest utility interval; converts this interval to a filter predicate; and then, as before, attempts to propagate the corresponding filter box as far upstream as possible to a split point. This strategy, which we refer to as backward interval propagation, admittedly has limited scope because it requires the application of the inverse function for each operator passed upstream (Aurora boxes do not necessarily have inverses). In an alternative strategy, forward interval propagation, Aurora starts from an output and goes upstream until it encounters a split point (or reaches the source). It then estimates a proper filter predicate and propagates it in downstream direction to see what results at the output. By trial-and-error, Aurora can converge on a desired filter predicate. Note that a combination of these two strategies can also be utilized. First, Aurora can apply backward propagation until a box, say b, whose operator’s inverse is difficult to compute. Aurora can then apply forward propagation between the insertion location of the filter box and b. This algorithm can be applied iteratively until sufficient load is shed.