Frequent pattern mining from a transactional or relational datasets with
support greater than a certain user defined threshold plays an important
role in many data mining application. However, real-world databases contain
noise that can make important information ambiguous; resulting in it
will not appear in the mining result. Therefore, we need a method that
copes with such variations in an association pattern, which is called a
fault-tolerant pattern (FT-pattern). For example, coughing, fever, runny
nose, headache, and sore throat are all signs of catching a cold. But peo
ple who catch a cold won’t always get all these symptoms at the same
time, and the rule R: Patients who have at least three of the following
symptoms {coughing, fever, runny nose, headache, sore throat} are catching
a cold is more reasonable corresponding to the real-world situation. R
is fault-tolerant in the sense that it requires matching just part of the data.
Discovering frequent FT-patterns in muti-dimensional database is
first proposed in [6]. However, this approach may generate sparse patterns,
which may contain subpatterns that do not appear frequently. Another
milestone of FT-pattern mining is [4], in which extending Apriori
and developing FT-Apriori for frequent FT-pattern mining allows the mining
out of a complete set of FT-patterns. However, [4] still has the drawbacks
of Apriori-based algorithms. In response, [5] developed FTP-mine,
which finds FT-patterns by the concept of pattern growth. [8] uses bit
vector representation to represent data and developed a vector-based mining
algorithm. [9] generalized the problem of mining fixed-value FTpatterns
into relaxation criteria and constraints and proposed to mine only
statistical information of the corresponding FT-patterns. [1] considers a
constraint-based mining approach for relevant fault-tolerant formal concept
mining. The main defect of previous approaches is their definition of
the number of faults tolerable in a pattern as a fixed number. Defining the
number of faults tolerable in the patterns as a fixed number of items is not
objective. For example, the function of a protein is determined by its
structure but not sequence. It is possible that two proteins of similar function
have different sequence lengths, e.g., the family of heat shock proteins.
In this case, it is hard to mine them together using FT pattern mining
with fixed number of tolerable faults.
Instead of mining patterns of different lengths while tolerating a
fixed number of faults, [2] addressed the problem of mining proportional
FT-patterns in which the number of faults tolerable in the pattern is proportional
to the pattern length. Moreover, the concept and proposed methods
are demonstrated in [3] for predicting epitopes of spike proteins of
SARS-CoV and concludes that the patterns are more concise than that of
fixed FT-patterns mining for this application. However, the proposed algorithms
are too violent. Therefore, [7] presents a framework named PFM
to mine proportional FT-patterns efficiently. The PFM algorithm for mining
proportional FT-patterns can be regarded as a breadth-first mining
strategy, and is efficient if the entire bitmap of the database can be loaded
into memory. However, because PFM generates candidates level by level,
the bitvectors associated with each candidate should be loaded into
memory for further checking. Memory swapping is performed when the
bitvectors can not fit into memory, and it makes the cost of I/O operations
high. Therefore, to reduce the number of disk I/O operations, a depth-first
mining strategy is proposed in this paper. The remainder of this paper is
organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the problem definition and
preliminaries. Section 3 describes the proposed algorithms in detail. Section
4 discusses the experimental results and analysis. Conclusions are
finally drawn in Section 5.