In recent years, semantic search has become increasingly important in Web information retrieval. In addition to syntaxbased information (e.g., keywords), queries may also include semantic information, such that the search is constrained within related categories that may result in more precise results.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). CIKM’08, October 26–30, 2008, Napa Valley, California, USA. ACM 978-1-59593-991-3/08/10.
To support semantic search, both queries and data need to be captured under the same conceptual framework, such that the similarity between them can be measured at a common“semantic”level. We consider the widely studied ontology as the conceptual framework in this work, which has been proven e?ective in categorizing real-world data and widely used in Semantic Web applications. In P2P networks, data are distributed across a large number of peers. Thus queries are shipped to those peers that hold result data. It has been demonstrated that, a hybrid architecture that integrates both structured and unstructured overlay networks is e?cient with respect to communication cost [1]. In this work, we also develop a hybrid P2P architecture that supports semantic search. Brie?y, peers with similar interests are clustered into groups and arranged in a balanced-tree-based overlay network. A query is ?rst propagated among peers within the local group (of common interests) based on the query semantics. Since peers often ask for information that they are interested in, the local group most likely can provide results (e.g., satisfying the syntax query component), incurring little communication cost. If the local group does not contain satisfying results, queries will be routed via the hierarchical overlay to locate other groups with relevant interests for subsequent search. Our contributions in this paper consist of the following: (1) the proposed approach is the ?rst to exploit the ontologybased classi?cation of peer interests in a hybrid search architecture for P2P semantic search. (2) by clustering peers based on the similarity of interests, we build an e?ective hierarchical overlay network, and introduce e?cient hybrid search algorithms; and (3) through simulations we show that our approach performs better than baseline algorithms in large-scale P2P information retrieval. 