In many applications, data typically present in the form
of sequence(s). This may be either a consequence of employing
a natural temporal ordering among individual data
(e.g., financial market data) or a result of complying to some
inherent physical structure (e.g., protein sequences in chromosomes).
The input sequence is usually very long, which
demands high scalability of the pattern discovery process.
As an important research direction of the data mining field,
mining patterns in long sequential data has been widely
studied during recent years, which includes but is not limited
to the following application domains.
‧ Bio-Medical Study. Each human gene consists a sequence
of (usually over a half million) amino acids.
A certain combination of amino acids may uniquely
define a specific aspect of the biological function or
appearance of a cell. Identifying such kind of meaningful
combinations plays a crucial role in understanding
the fundamental of life towards a deeper level, which
has been the goal of many biologists for many years.
By viewing the chromosomes as sequences of amino
acids, the above task can be transformed into mining
sequential patterns that satisfying some user-specified
criteria.
Performance Analysis. Many system-monitoring applications
involve collecting and anal~/zing attributes
whose values evolve over time. Patterns of system
state transition has been proved to be very useful in
predicting system behavior from a recent state history
and in preventing disastrous circumstances from occurring.
‧ Client Profile. User profiles can be built based on the
discovered pattern on trace logs. Such knowledge can
either be utilized to develop an optimal proxy caching
scheme or be used to provide better market targeting
tools.
As a matter of fact, noises exist in most applications, which
adds considerable challenges to the pattern mining process
simply because many important patterns may be concealed
if the model employed fails to accommodate noises properly.
Depending on the type of application and the user's interests,
tolerable noises may present in different formats and
hence require different models accordingly.
1. Injection off noise. A typical example of noise injection
is that, a client may accidentally access some irrelevant
web page by mistake when he/she surfs on the Internet.
Such access entries may be regarded as random
noises inserted in the long traces during the process of
mining meaningful patterns from the collected trace
logs.
2. Over-population of uninteresting patterns. Different
symbols (or events) may occur at vastly different frequencies
by nature. For example, the sales of lamps
is typically much higher than that of big furniture.
However, even though patterns involving less expansive
goods (such as lamps) occur more frequently, they
may be considered not very interesting if the occurrences
of such patterns are within people's expectation.
In contrast, unexpected patterns involving furniture, if
any, may be of great interests (probably because of a
considerably high profit margin) even though such patterns
may have relatively small number of occurrences
in the data. Unfortunately, the significance of an infrequent
but interesting pattern can be easily diluted by
the "over-populated" unwanted patterns. These unwanted
patterns can be viewed as "noise" in a broad
sense because their presence obstructs (to some extent)
the discovery of interesting infrequent patterns.
To address above issues, powerful model(s) that suits each
specific purpose is demanded to provide clear separation between
useful patterns and noises, and efficient mining algorithms
are also needed to make these new models applicable
to long data sequences. As mentioned before, the sequence
can be very long and can easily range to more than hundreds
of millions of symbols. This may result in very long
patterns that may contain thousands of symbols. Therefore,
any pattern discovery algorithm has to scale well with
respect to both the length of the input sequence and the
length of potential patterns. In this paper, we will focus on
each type of noise in a separate section and present some
recent advances to meet the challenge.