Several factors, such as the update rate, churn rate, data size and
network size, affect the maintenance cost of structured overlays.
In this subsection, we evaluate the performance of our scheme in
different network configurations. The major metric is the average
message number of a node per minute. In Figure 13, we vary the
update rate to test the performances of different strategies. The update
rate is defined as the number of tuples that are deleted/inserted
per second. In the experiment, the node uniformly picks a tuple
to update. In PISCES, the index should be updated only if the
updates involve the indexed data. On the contrary, in the full indexing
strategy, all updates should be reflected. In Figure 13, as
the update rate increases, the costs of CAN-FULL and BATONFULL
increase linearly, whereas the update rate has minor effect on
CAN-PISCES and BATON-PISCES. BATON based schemes perform
better than those based on CAN because the routing costs in
BATON and CAN are O(logN) and O
respectively. For a 2-
Dimensional CAN, the routing cost is much higher compared to
other overlays. This can be solved by creating some random routing
fingers, as in MURK [18].
We compare the effect of churn in Figure 14. Even in a highly
dynamic network when one peer leaves or joins in about every three
minutes (churn rate of 0.005), PISCES remains cost effective. This
confirms the robustness of PISCES.
As shown in Figure 15(a), the strategies based on full indexing
incur high overheads when publishing the node’s data, while
PISCES generates much less cost because it only needs to publish
the most popular data and a small range index. In Figure 15(b), we
only show the results of PISCES to focus on their trends. The cost
of PISCES grows slowly as the data size increases.
From Figure 16, we observe that as network size increases (ranging
from 32 to 256), the routing cost for all strategies (partial and
full indexing) also increase. However, because PISCES publishes
much fewer data than its full indexing counterpart, the cost increases
at a much slower rate