The idea in velocity density estimation is to estimate the
rate at which the changes in the data density are occurring
at each spatial location based on some user-defined
temporal window ht. In general, when a user is faced with
a massive data stream, there are several interesting
questions which arise: for example, what are the spatial
locations at which the data is increasing, reducing, or
shifting to? What is the level of change in the data
characteristics occurring at different spatial locations?
Intuitively, the temporal window ht is associated with the
time horizon over which the rate of change is measured.
Thus, if ht is chosen to be large, then the velocity density
estimation technique provides long-term trends, whereas if
ht is chosen to be small, then the trends are relatively short
term. This provides the user flexibility in analyzing the
changes in the data over different kinds of time horizons. In
addition, we have a spatial smoothing vector hs whose
function is quite similar to the standard spatial smoothing
vector which is used in kernel density estimation.
Let t be the current instant and S be the set of data points
which have arrived in the time window et  ht; tT. We
intend to estimate the rate of increase in density at spatial
location X and time t by using two sets of estimates: the
forward time slice density estimate and the reverse time slice
density estimate. Intuitively, the forward time slice estimate
measures the density function for all spatial locations at a
given time t based on the set of data points which have
arrived in the past time window et  ht; tT. Similarly, the
reverse time slice estimate measures the density function at
a given time t based on the set of data points which will
arrive in the future time window et; t t htT. Let us assume
that the ith data point in S is denoted by, where i varies from 
1 to . Then, the forward time slice estimate of the set S at the 
spatial location X and time t is given by:
Here; is a spatiotemporal kernel smoothing
function, hs is the spatial kernel vector, and ht is temporal
kernel width. The kernel function ; t is a
smooth distribution which decreases with increasing value
of t  ti. The value of Cf is a suitably chosen normalization
constant, so that the entire density over the spatial plane is
one unit. This is done because our purpose of calculating
the densities at the time slices is to compute the relative
variations in the density over the different spatial locations.
Thus, Cf is chosen such that we have:
The reverse time slice density estimate is also calculated in a
somewhat different way from the forward time slice density
estimate. We assume that the set of points which have
arrived in the time interval  is given by U. As
before, the value of Cr is chosen as a normalization
constant. Correspondingly, we define the value of the
reverse time slice density estimate ; tT as follows:
Note that in this case, we are using ti  t in the argument
instead of t  ti. Thus, the reverse time-slice density in the
interval  would be exactly the same as the forward
time slice density if we assumed that time was reversed and
the data stream arrived in reverse order, starting at t t ht
and ending at t. Examples of the forward and reverse
density profiles are illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively.
We note that Figs. 1 and 2 are quite similar except for a few
subtle differences at various places.
For a given spatial location X and time T, let us
examine the nature of the functions Fehs;  and
 Note that both functions are almost
exactly the same and use the same data points from the
interval , except that one has been calculated
assuming time runs forward, whereas the other has been
calculated assuming that the time runs in reverse.
Furthermore, the volumes under each of these curves,
when measured over all spatial locations X, is equal to
one unit because of the normalization. Correspondingly,
the density profiles at a given spatial location X would
be different between the two depending upon how the
relative trends have changed in the intervala greater number of
points which are closer to X have arrived at the end of the
interval. On the other hand, when a greater number of
points which are closer to X are at the beginning of the
interval then the velocity density is negative at
the spatial location. If the trends have largely remained
unchanged over the interval, then the velocity density at the
location X will be almost zero. Thus, the velocity density at
a given point provides an intuitive understanding of the
rate of change of the density at that spatial location over the
time horizon A global overview of the rate of
changes of densities at different points specific to the time T
is referred to as the temporal velocity profile. An example of a
temporal velocity profile (which will be discussed in a
greater detail in the empirical section) is illustrated in Fig. 3.
Note that the total volume which is trapped between the
temporal velocity profile curve and the spatial axis plane is
at most 2=ht, since the total volume under each of the
forward and reverse time slice density curves is exactly one
unit. The larger this volume, the greater the total amount of
evolution that has occurred. We note that the velocity density
may also be interchangeably referred to as the evolution
density, since it refers to the rate of evolution of the
underlying data. We note that the term velocity density is
more intuitive for spatial applications, whereas the term
evolution density is more intuitive for real applications
which do not necessarily have spatial interpretation. In
order to retain consistency in terminology, we will refer to
the technique as velocity density, though the term evolution
density may have better interpretation for many applications.
In a later section, we will discuss how the volume
under the evolution density curve may be used in order to
provide evolution rates for a data stream which are
intuitively comprehensible to a user