Given a d-dimensional data set, a point p is said to dominate
another point q if it is better than or equal to q in all
dimensions and better than q in at least one. A skyline is
a subset of points in the data set that are not dominated
by any other points. Skyline queries, which return skyline
points, are useful in many decision making applications that
involve high dimensional data sets. We give two examples
here.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
SIGMOD 2006, June 27–29, 2006, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-256-9/06/0006 ...$5.00
Example 1.1 Cell Phone Finder
Consider a person looking for a suitable cell phone at a website
1. He/she may care about a large number of features
including weight, size, talk time, standby time, screen size,
screen resolution, data rate and camera quality in order to
pick one that suits him/her. There are too many phones
at the website for the user to examine them all manually.
Computing the skyline over these cell phone features may
remove a large number of cell phones whose features are
“worse” than those in the skyline, hopefully leaving only
a manageable number of candidates for manual evaluation.

Example 1.2Movie Rating
Consider a person looking for top-rated movies based on the
ratings given by other users2. In this case, the rating of each
user correspond to a dimension in the data set and given the
large number of users, the data set being handled is obviously
a high-dimensional one. The skyline of the data set
will contain top-rated movies while movies that are consistently
ranked worse than others in the data set are pruned
away. 
We note that in both the above cases, ranking can be done
by providing some preference functions [1, 8] and requesting
users to provide some weight assignments for their preferred
features or more trusted users in the latter case. However
providing such weight assignments for a large number of dimensions
is not always easy without any initial knowledge
about the data. For example, it is not clear how weight assignments
can be provided to aggregate the talk time and
camera quality of a phone into one grade. In fact, as stated
in the seminal paper on skyline operator [2], the aim of providing
the skyline to the user is to help them to determine
the weight assignment.
Computing skylines in high dimensional data sets is challenging
because of the large number of skyline points [9, 14,
17]. On the movie ranking website, for example, it is nearly
impossible to find a movie which is ranked lower than another
movie by all the users. Such a blowup in the answer
set not only renders the skyline operator worthless (with
respect to the desired pruning of candidates), but it also results
in high computational complexity for both index and
non-index methods as many pairwise comparisons are performed
without effecting any pruning.
1http://www.phonescoop.com/phones/finder.php?m=e
2http://movielens.umn.edu/