In the previous section, we discussed how to calculate the
temporal velocity profiles which illustrate the rate of change
of density at each fixed spatial location. Even better insight
can be obtained by examining the nature of the spatial
velocity profiles, which provide an insight into how the
data is shifting. For each spatial point, we would like to
compute the directions of movements of the data at a given
instant. The motivation in developing a spatial velocity
profile is to give a user a spatial overview of the
reorganizations in relative data density at different points.
This brings to us the following interesting problem: Given
the temporal velocity profile, how do we calculate the
directions in which the data is shifting? In order to
understand this, we observe that when data is shifting
from one point to another, the source of the shift shows a
reduction in the density, whereas the destination of the shift
shows an increase in the density. Therefore, there is an
increasing density gradient from the source to the destination.
The exact direction of the (aggregate) shift is
determined by finding the direction in which the gradient
is the largest.
Let us define an -pertubation along the ith dimension by
is the unit vector along the ith
dimension. For a given spatial location X, we first compute
the velocity gradient along each of the i dimensions. We
denote the velocity gradient along the ith dimension by
for spatial location X and time t. This value is
computed by subtracting the density at spatial location X
from the density at pertubation along the ith
dimension) and dividing the result by . The smaller the
value of , the better the approximation. Therefore, we have:
The value of ; tT is negative when the velocity density
decreases with increasing value of the ith coordinate of
spatial location X. The gradient ; is given by. This vector 
gives the spatial gradient at a given grid point both in terms 
of direction and magnitude. The spatial velocity profile is 
illustrated by creating a spatial plot which illustrates the 
directions of the
data shifts at different grid points by directed markers
which mirror these gradients both in terms of directions
and magnitude. An example of a spatial velocity profile is
illustrated in Fig. 4. We note that the temporal and spatial
velocity profiles convey essentially the same information,
but with different visualizations. The first is a threedimensional
density change plot, whereas the second is a
two-dimensional contour plot which provides a better
understanding of the direction of data shift.