Our first approach to compute k-dominant skyline points
from an input data set D (over a set of dimensions S) is
similar in spirit to the nested-loop approach [2] in that it
makes one sequential scan of the data set. The algorithm
(shown in Algorithm 1) is based on the following two key
properties.
To determine if a point p is k-dominant, property P2 implies
that it is not sufficient to use only k-dominant skyline
points to compare against p since it is possible for p to be
not k-dominant even though it is not k-dominated by any
of the k-dominant points. On the other hand, property P1
implies that it is sufficient to compare p against the set of
free skyline points (instead of all the points in D) to detect
if a point p is k-dominant. Thus, based on Lemma 4.1, our
algorithm computes k-dominant skyline points by actually
computing the free skyline points in D and using them to
eliminate non-k-dominate skyline points. Specifically, two
sets of intermediate points are maintained as D is being
processed: (1) R stores the set of intermediate k-dominant
skyline points in D, and (2) T stores the set of intermediate
skyline points in D that are not k-dominant (i.e., not in R).
Together, R ∪ T gives the set of skyline points in D. Since
T is used only for pruning purpose, we can minimize the
size of T by storing only the unique skyline points; i.e., a
new (non-k-dominant) skyline p is added to T only if .
As an additional preprocessing optimization, the points in
D can be first sorted in non-ascending order of the sum of all
their dimension values (step 1). The purpose of this heuristic,
which was first proposed in [4], is to try to maximize the
number of skyline points that occur before the non-skyline
points in D so that the non-skyline points are eliminated as
early as possible thereby reducing the overhead of maintaining
them before they are pruned.
Example 4.1 Applying the One-Scan algorithm (with k =
5) on the data set D in Fig. 1, points p1, p2, and p3 will
each be inserted into R. However, p4 will be inserted into T
since it is 5-dominated by p1. Thus, the algorithm returns
{p1, p2, p3} as the set of 5-dominant skyline points.