As explained in Section 3, the Echo protocol relies on tim-
ing: the amount of time it takes to get a response from the
prover bounds how far the prover can be from the verier.
We will now show that it is impossible for an adversary out-
side R to convince the verier that it is in R.
Proof of security.. The heart of the argument is that an
attacker would not be able to get the sound signal to the
verier in time. In order to conrm that the prover is at
`, all a particular verier node v must do is verify that the
incoming sound signal, which includes the outgoing nonce,
is received within for the attacker to hear N and get a response to v is 
Consequently, the attacker's signal cannot reach the veri-
er before the deadline. Note that nowhere in our analysis
did we rely on which verier node was used. The only dif-
ference would be in the magnitude of the error terms and,
therefore, in the chance that the location claim would even
be accepted for verication. The attacker does not gain
any advantage by selecting a dierent verier from the one
elected to participate.
Attacks. One possible attack could exploit the dierence
in propagation speed of sound in dierent media. If the
verier's estimation of s is slower than the actual one, then
the proof above does not apply. If this is a valid threat
model|say there is a lot of metal near the verication region
that is capable of transmitting sound from the outside|then
the verier's estimation of s should be adjusted. This can
be done once on a site-specic basis. An alternate defense
would be to have other verier nodes conrm the estimate
of s based on when the sound signals are received.
More generally, we require that there be no way for an
attacker to generate sound waves from afar without being
subject to speed-of-sound delays. For instance, if a remote
attacker could call up some person in R over the telephone,
convince the victim to put the call on speakerphone, inter-
cept message 2 from afar using a large antenna, and transmit
the appropriate ultrasonic signal (i.e., message 3) over the
telephone with suciently high delity, then the attacker
might be spoof his location. The key is that the attacker
has evaded the speed-of-sound limit on signal propagation
by exploiting the ability to remotely actuate a loudspeaker
located inside R. We expect such \remote actuation" at-
tacks will be very dicult to mount in practice, for several
reasons. Nonetheless, this example illustrates a crucial secu-
rity assumption: we assume that low-delay remote actuation
of sonic signals is infeasible.
Variants We Rejected. One might also consider the impli-
cations of other variants of the protocol, where the use of
sound and radio for the outgoing and incoming signals is
changed from (radio, sound) to (radio, radio), (sound, ra-
dio), or (sound, sound). If radio communication is used in
both directions, then the error term c would be very large
(105 to 106 times as large as the sound case), and it is quite
likely that the verier would not accept location claims at
all, since the error might exceed the size of R itself! Thus,
at least one of the two directions should use sound.
Why did we reject (sound, radio)? There is a subtle at-
tack. If sound is used in the outgoing direction, an attacker
might be able to break security by using laser-based remote
\bugging." The trick is to bounce a laser o a window within