There are many natural variants of the secure location
problem. We focus on solving the in-region verication
problem: a set of veriers V wish to verify whether a prover
p is in a region R of interest. R may be a room, a building,
a stadium, or other physical area. The region typically has
some sort of physical control to restrict people's entry into
it; the purpose, then, is to control access to resources that
are not intrinsically constrained by physical security, such
as wireless networks. The verier infrastructure V may, in
some cases, be a distributed system consisting of multiple
nodes.
The protocol must run correctly in the face of adversaries.
Thus, when p does not in fact have a physical presence inside
R, the verier must be careful not to accept p's claim to be in
R. Furthermore, if p does have a presence in R, the verier
should accept p's claim; otherwise the protocol would not
be useful in practice. We therefore require the following two
properties to ensure that the protocol is useful and secure:
 Completeness: If p and V both behave according to
the protocol, and p is in R, then V will accept that p
is in R.
 Security: If V behaves according to the protocol and
accepts p's claim, then p, or a party colluding with p,
has a physical presence in R.
It is important to distinguish between the problem we
are addressing, the in-region verication problem, and the
secure location determination problem. In the latter prob-
lem, V attempts to securely discover the physical location
of p. In contrast, in the in-region verication problem, p
claims to be in a particular region, and V accepts or rejects
the claim. The prover's location claim serves as a hint for
the verier to conrm or disprove. Framing the problem
in terms of secure in-region verication, not secure location
determination, simplies the problem and allows dierent
location determination algorithms to be used.
In fact, it is possible to compose an in-region verication
protocol with any location determination algorithm, even a
potentially insecure one, without compromising the security
of the ultimate guarantee that a prover is in the region. The
in-region verication algorithm veries whether the claimed
location is in R or not; thus, p can use an insecure local-
ization algorithm to generate a claimed location that will
be securely tested for accuracy by V . At worst, p's claim
will be rejected; in no case will V believe something about
p's location that has not been securely checked. The prover
p thus has the exibility to choose any appropriate loca-
tion determination algorithm, even if it has not been proven
secure. After running the determination algorithm, p will
know which claims it can plausibly make.