Consider rst a simplied case, where we have only a sin-
gle verier node v, where the region R is a circle1, and where
this circle is centered at v. This scenario is shown pictorially
in Figure 1. Now, suppose that the prover claims to be at
some location ` 2 R inside the region.
We present a simple protocol for validating the location
claim in this restricted case. First note that if the claimed
location ` is not inside R, then the verier can reject the
claim immediately. Thus, we may safely assume that the
prover claims to be inside R. The protocol begins when
the verier node v sends a packet containing a nonce to the
prover using RF; the prover immediately echoes the packet
back to the verier using ultrasound. The verier node v
can then calculate how long it should take to hear the echo,
namely, the sum of the time it takes to reach ` using RF, plus
the time it takes for a return packet to go from ` to v using
ultrasound. Thus, the total elapsed time for the prover to
hear the echoed nonce should be about d(v; `)=c + d(v; `)=s
seconds. The only thing v has to do is time this process: If
the elapsed time from the initial transmission to reception of
the echo packet is more than this amount, the verier node
v rejects the prover's claim; otherwise, if the elapsed time is
at most this expected amount, v accepts. This protocol is
summarized in Figure 2.
Why does this work? If the prover is able to return the
packet in sucient time, then the verier is assured that
the prover is within d(v; `) meters of v. This means that `
is known to be inside a circle of radius d(v; `) centered at v.
Call this circle C; then we know ` 2 C. Since R is dened
to be a circle of radius at least d(v; `) centered at v, we have
1In practice, the region is a sphere, instead of circle. How-
ever, for simplicity, our discussion will be phrased in terms
of circles in the plane. This simplication will make the pro-
tocol easier to understand and does not aect the validity
of our results.
C  R, and hence ` 2 R. In short, we know that the prover
must be inside R.
If the prover cannot return the nonce in sucient time,
it may be for one of two reasons. Either the prover is more
than d(v; `) meters away from v, or the prover has some pro-
cessing delay between receiving the RF packet and returning
the ultrasound packet. We will explore this latter issue in
the following section.
What if the prover tries to cheat by delaying his response?
This attack only increases the total elapsed time of the pro-
cess, thereby making the verier reject. Intuitively, the
longer it takes to complete the protocol, the farther away
the prover appears to be. It is not in the prover's inter-
est to appear to be farther from v, because this will put
the prover's apparent location outside of R, hence making v
reject the prover's claim.
Can the prover cheat by starting the transmission of the
response early? No, this attack is not possible. The nonce in
the packet prevents the prover from sending a reply before
it has received the outgoing RF packet. Hence, the speed of
light and sound prevents the prover from pretending to be
closer to v than he really is.