One issue not yet addressed is when a master agent should deliver its tracking result to the outside
world. We assume that one of the sensors in the network serves as the gateway connecting to a
location server in the wireline network. From time to time, the tracking result should be sent to the
location server. We assume that more tracking result will be accumulated as time proceeds. So an
optimization problem is that the master agent needs to decide whether it should carry the tracking
result from sensor to sensor, or forward the result to the gateway.
We assume that for each object being tracked, the tracking results are generated at a constant rate
r, and each tracking result is of size d bytes. That is, in time interval t, the amount of tracking
result is t · r · d. Further, a sequence of tracking results can be combined with a fusion factor ,
0< 1, at a basic cost of b bytes. Specifically, the above tracking results can be compressed into
b + t · r · d ·  bytes. In most cases, data fusion is beneficial. This is normally happens when data
has certain level of dependence. In the following, we propose three data delivery solutions. Note that
the first one is in fact not an agent-based solution. It only serves as a referential strategy so as to make
comparison to our agent-based solutions.
The first one is called the Non-Agent-Based (NAB) strategy. Each sensor works independently
and forwards its sensing results back to the gateway from time to time. Note that the sensing result is
raw data and needs to be combined with other sensors’ sensing results at the gateway to calculate the
object’s locations. The shortest paths, which are assumed to be supported by the underlying routing
protocol, are always used for data delivery. Also, we assume an ideal situation that only the three
sensors nearest to the object will track the object.
The second solution is called the Threshold-Based (TB) strategy. A predefined threshold value T
is given. The master agent will accumulate the tracking results and “carry” the result with it as long
as the amount of result does not exceed T. Whenever the amount of results (after fusion) reaches T,
it will be forwarded to the gateway through a shortest path.
The third solution is called the Distance-Based (DB) strategy. The delivery action may be taken
only when the master agent moves. Basically, the distances from the agent’s current and next sensors
to the gateway are considered. Suppose that the master agent is currently at sensor Si and is going
to be migrated to sensor Si+1. Let Ni be the current amount of tracking results accumulated by the
agent before it leaves Si. Also, we assume that Ni+1 is the expected amount of tracking results that
shall be accumulated by the agent at Si+1 (this value can be formulated by a constant T · r · d · ,
where T is the expected residential time of an agent at a sensor).
If the master decides to carry the tracking result with it, the expected cost is:
where the first term is the cost to migrate the current result to the next sensor, and the second term
is the expected cost to deliver the fused result at the next sensor to the gateway, g. Function d()
specifies the minimum number of hops between two sensors. If the master decides to deliver its
current tracking result to the gateway, the expected cost is:
Subtracting these two factors, we have
So the master agent will carry the results with it iff C1 < C2; otherwise, the results will be sent
back to the gateway. Since sensors Si and Si+1 are neighbors, d(g, St) ? d(g, St+1) = ?1, 0, or
1. Considering whether the agent is moving away from or closer to the gateway, we simplify the
condition into three cases.