As mentioned, when only part of the data are indexed, queries
whose involved tuples are not indexed cannot be answered using
the index. In this case, flooding the entire network is an alternative.
This is clearly undesirable and impractical for large scale network
because of the significant communication overhead. In this paper,
a new kind of index, the approximate range index, is used to handle
this problem. Suppose the max and min values of attribute A in
node ni are vmax and vmin respectively. ni can build a range index
[vmin, vmax] to indicate that it may answer queries which overlap
with this range. We refer to this kind of index an approximate range
index. However, as such an approximate index introduces false
positive (i.e., a query is forwarded to a node that contains no answer
to the query) if applied for query processing, it must be carefully
designed for good performance. For example, in an extreme case,
assume node ni’s tuples have the same A value, vmin; then, the index
will always return a false candidate if used to answer the queries in
(vmin, vmax]. In our system, a range index entry is in the format
of (namespace, min, max, number of unique values). To measure
the effectiveness of an approximate range index, we define False
Positive Factor as:
Definition 4.1. False Positive Factor
The false positive factor (ρ) of a range is defined as the probability
of returning a false positive for an arbitrary query (range or exact
query) that overlaps with the range.
As we use cell as a unit for index building, two kinds of False
Positive Factor should be considered, outer cell factor and inner
cell factor. To simplify the notation, we use |R| to represent the
total number of cells in the range R.
Definition 4.2. Outer Cell Factor
Outer cell factor is used to estimate the false positive of queries
with range greater than cell length l. Suppose f (i) returns the frequency
of consecutive i empty cells, outer cell factor ρ0 is computed
as:
For example, in Figure 2, let the shaded cells represent nonempty
cells. f (1) returns 4 for both Figure 2(a) and Figure 2(b)
(4 empty cells in each case), while f (2) returns 1 (r1 = (c2, c3)) for
Figure 2(a) and 2 (r1 = (c5, c6), r2 = (c6, c7)) for Figure 2(b) respectively.
Finally, the outer cell factor of Figure 2(a) and Figure 2(b)
are estimated as 17.8% and 25% respectively. Note that the two
ranges with the same length and same number of non-empty cells
in Figure 2 have different false positive factors due to their distinct
data distributions.
Definition 4.3. Inner Cell Factor
Suppose P(r) represents the possibility of issuing a range query
with length r < l (l is the cell length), and ni is the number of unique
values in cell i, the inner cell factor for range R is computed as:
Inner cell factor gives a more precise description for possible
false positives of small range queries (exact query are 0-length
range query). If the query distribution is unknown, we assume that
queries of different ranges are issued in the same probability. Then
the cell’s inner false positive factor can be calculated as Finally,
the false positive factor of range R is estimated as:
To incrementally compute the false positive factor, we introduce
the following properties.
Lemma 4.1. If range r is chosen to be indexed and ci is a border
cell of r, ci must be non-empty cell. Otherwise, we can get a better
indexing strategy.
Proof. (sketch) If a range r has empty cells as its borders, we
can remove the empty cells and obtain an indexed range with lower
cost. The range can answer the same set of queries but the maintenance
cost is reduced since the number of false positives is decreased.
As shown in Figure 3, the original indexing strategy has two
entries, [L, a] and [a, U]. But we can shrink them to get two ranges,
[L, b] and [c, d], with lower cost. The removed empty range from
the index entries must be the maximal empty range (all the cells in
the range are empty cells and its adjacent cells are non-empty).
Theorem 4.1. Suppose a range R is partitioned into a maximal
empty range r0 and two non-empty ones, r1 and r2. The outer cell
factors of ranges satisfy: