A. Motivation Example
With some local knowledge about individual vertices in a
social network, an adversary may attack the privacy of some
victims. As a concrete example, consider a synthesized social
network of “close-friends” shown in Figure 1(a). Each vertex
in the network represents a person. An edge links two persons
who are close friends.
Suppose the network is to be published. To preserve privacy,
is it sufficient to remove all identities as shown in Figure 1(b)?
Unfortunately, if an adversary has some knowledge about the
neighbors of an individual, the privacy may still be leaked.
If an adversary knows that Ada has two close friends who
know each other, and has another two close friends who
do not know each other, i.e., the 1-neighborhood graph of
Ada as shown in Figure 1(c), then the vertex representing
Ada can be identified uniquely in the network since no other
vertices have the same 1-neighborhood graph. Similarly, Bob
can be identified in Figure 1(b) if the adversary knows the
1-neighborhood graph of Bob.
Identifying individuals from released social networks intrudes
privacy immediately. In this example, by identifying

Ada and Bob, an adversary can even know from the released
social network (Figure 1(b)) that Ada and Bob are close
friends, and they share one common close friend. Other private
information can be further derived such as how well a victim
is connected to the rest of the network and the relative position
of the victim to the center of the network.
To protect the privacy satisfactorily, one way is to guarantee
that any individual cannot be identified correctly in the
anonymized social network with a probability higher than 1
k ,
where k is a user-specified parameter carrying the same spirit
in the k-anonymity model [5]. By adding a noise edge linking
Harry and Irene, the 1-neighborhood graph of every vertex in
Figure 1(d) is not unique. An adversary with the knowledge
of 1-neighborhood cannot identify any individual from this
anonymous graph with a confidence higher than 1/
2 .