Several popular and useful search engines—such as AltaVista, Excite,
HotBot, Infoseek, Lycos, and Northern Light—attempt to maintain
full-text indexes of the World Wide Web. However, relying on
a single standard search engine has limitations. The standard search engines
have limited coverage,1,2 outdated databases, and are sometimes unavailable
due to problems with the network or the engine itself. The precision
of standard engine results can also vary because they generally focus on
handling queries quickly and use relatively simple ranking schemes.3 Rankings
can be further muddled by keyword “spamming” to increase a page’s
rank order. Often, the relevance of a particular page is obvious only after
loading it and finding the query terms.
Metasearch engines, such as MetaCrawler and SavvySearch, attempt
to contend with the problem of limited coverage by submitting queries
to several standard search engines at once.4,5 The primary advantages of
metasearch engines are that they combine the results of several search
engines and present a consistent user interface.5 However, most
metasearch engines rely on the documents and summaries returned by
standard search engines and so inherit their limited precision and vulnerability
to keyword spamming.
We developed the NEC Research Institute (NECI) metasearch engine to
improve the efficiency and precision of Web search by downloading and
analyzing each document and then displaying results that show the query
terms in context. This helps users more readily determine if the document is
relevant without having to download each page. This technique is simple,
yet it can be very effective, particularly when dealing with the Web’s large,
diverse, and poorly organized database. Results from the NECI engine are
returned progressively after each page is downloaded and analyzed, rather
than after all pages are downloaded. Pages are downloaded in parallel and
the first result is typically displayed in less time than
a standard search engine takes to display its response.
The NECI metasearch engine is currently in use
by employees of the NEC Research Institute. This
article describes its features, implementation, and
performance.
A recent study by Anastasios Tombros verified the
advantages of summaries incorporating query term
context.6 His study found that users working with
query-sensitive summaries found relevant documents
faster and performed relevance judgments more accurately
and rapidly than users working with an abstract
or query-insensitive document summary. Querysensitive
summaries also greatly reduced the need for
users to access the full text of documents.
