A number of authors have proposed using time-of-ight
measurements and the speed of light to securely gain lo-
cation information about untrusted parties. Brands and
Chaum proposed a time-bounded challenge-response proto-
col [4] as a defense against man-in-the-middle attacks on
cryptographic identication schemes. Hu, et al., proposed
using temporal packet leashes for wireless networks to de-
fend against similar attacks [12]. However, a major limita-
tion of these schemes is that both the prover and verier send
RF signals, requiring a much more accurate timing system
at the verier as well as tight real-time processing guaran-
tees on both the prover and verier for accurate readings.
For these reasons, we believe our algorithm is better suited
to mobile devices than those previous proposals.
In independent and concurrent work, Waters and Felten
present a scheme that uses round-trip time-of-ight of RF
signals to achieve goals similar to ours [19]. Their architec-
ture is similar to ours, in that they, too, suggest focusing on
secure location verication rather than on secure location
determination. However, their reliance on RF seems likely
to limit deployment, like the previous proposals mentioned
above. Additionally, by using tamper-resistant trusted de-
vices, they are able to defend against stronger adversaries.
If their verier accepts, they can successfully show that the
trusted device is at the specied location. In comparison,
we can show that the device or a collaborator has a presence
at the specied location.
The idea of using time-of-ight to estimate distance is
not a new one: it dates back to the birth of radar systems,
which often use time-dierence-of-arrival (TDOA) to deter-
mine the range to detected objects. Ultrasonic time-of-ight
ranging can even be found in nature, where it is used by bats.
Coarse-grained location authentication has been used in
the television industry to prevent cloning of set-top boxes [9].
Gabber and Wool propose four coarse-grained techniques,
relying on extensive telecommunications infrastructure such
as satellites, paging and cellular networks. Their techniques
rely on tamper-resistant hardware.
Location-limited channels provide a communication mech-
anism that is restricted to a short range and provides both
endpoints a mechanism to guarantee the authenticity of each
participant [16]. Balfanz, et al., have proposed using location-
limited channels for location-based access control [3], and
many others have also proposed use of limited-range radio
broadcasts as a way to verify proximity [13, 6, 5]. However,
there are no strong security guarantees that the communi-
cation range will always be limited as desired: an adversary
with more powerful equipment may be able to participate
in the protocols even if they are substantially further away
than non-malicious parties.
Finally, there are many techniques to help localize devices
[2, 14, 15, 10, 18, 1], GPS being one of the most widely
deployed. However, none of those works addressed secu-
rity, and in fact, GPS signals can be spoofed [17, x3.2.2].
Nonetheless, we have noted that combining a (possibly inse-
cure) localization mechanism with our secure location ver-
ication technique yields a secure localization algorithm.
Thus, insecure localization protocols should be seen as com-
plementary to our work on secure location verication.
Many authors have commented on the value of location-
based access control [7, 5, 3, 13, 6].