In this section, we present our JIT indexing strategy: only index
what is beneficial to the current system. If a data range becomes
popular, the nodes responsible for the range will receive
more queries. These nodes trigger an index requirement to data
owners. This behavior is similar to the publish/subscribe system.
The approximate range index can be considered as a subscription,
registering what data the node can provide. After receiving the
notification, the owner node publishes its tuple-level index for the
corresponding cells. Thus the partial indexes are built in a query
driven manner.
For a cell c, suppose there are k nodes having data in this cell
and node i has approximately ni tuples in the cell Let
nq be the average number of queries per second for this cell, if
is negative, the cell should construct tuple-level index, because
even the smallest range index (1 cell length) will incur too much
overhead. The integration based on query distribution can be computed
by Monte Carlo method. S samples are taken to estimate
the values. To emphasize the importance of recent queries, nq is
calculated as:
where q represents the query number in this second, n
q is the last
computed value of nq and f is an aging factor to degrade the effect
of old queries. This aging scheme is also adopted in web cache
management [29]. In our implementation, the query number is
computed periodically and the average value is applied. To get the
approximate values of k and ni in Formula 16, when we search the
index of a specific range in Algorithm 5, we piggy back the number
of tuples registered in the range indexes to the leaf node (recall the
range index format). Then the average number of tuples in a cell
of the node can be computed. This piggy back process is invoked
periodically.
The tuple-level index is constructed in three steps
1. Node responsible for the hot range decides to index tuples
for some cells according to Formula 16.
2. Algorithm 5 is invoked to find all nodes overlapping with the
cell. And a notification message is sent out to these nodes.
3. After publishing their data, the nodes update their local maintenance
trees of approximate range indexes.
The first two steps of creating partial index guarantee that all
online nodes achieve the same indexing strategy (for a tuple, it will
be indexed by all nodes or none of them). In step 2, once a node
m sends index notification messages, it records the indexed cell’s
ID. For the newly joining node, when it publishes its range index to
a node m, m will check its record for indexed cells and inform the
joining node about the global decision.
In step 3, the node, after sending its data for indexing, will update
its maintenance tree to reflect the new cost. For example, in
Figure 4, if tuple-level index is created for cell 1, the cost of node
D, B and A need to be recomputed. The cost of indexed cells are
removed from the range entry cost. If the estimated error exceeds
the error bound, the indexing strategy should be modified.
Similar to the index construction, if a node observes that an indexed
cell is no longer beneficial (formula 16 is positive), the node
will discard the index of the cell and inform the corresponding
nodes. The maintenance trees of the involved nodes are updated
as well.