Since join operators are usually expensive, sharing common join
operations can significantly reduce the amount of computation.
Figure 3.11 shows a query with a join operator that, for each
company, retrieves the price of its stock and the company’s
profile. The signature for the join operation is shown on the
right side of the figure. A join signature in our approach
contains the names of the two data sources and the predicate for
the join. The group optimizer groups join queries with the same
join signatures. A constant table is not needed in this case
because there is only one output intermediate file, whose name
is stored in the split operator. This file is used to hold the results
of the shared join operation.
There are two ways to group queries that contain both join
operators and selection operators. Figure 3.12 shows such an
example, which retrieves all stocks in the computer service
industry and the related company profiles. The group optimizer
can place the selection either below or above the join, so that
two different grouping sequences can be used during
incremental group optimization process. The group optimizer
chooses the better one based on a cost model. We discuss these
alternatives below using the query example in Figure 3.12.
If the selection operator (e.g., on Industry) is pulled above the
join operator, the group optimizer first groups the query by the
join signature. The selection signature, which contains the
intermediate file, is grouped next. The advantage of this method
is that it allows the same join operator to be shared by queries
with different selection operators. The disadvantage is that the
join, which will be performed before the selection, may be very
expensive and may generate a large intermediate file. If there are
only a small number of queries in the join group and each of
them has a highly selective selection predicate, then this
grouping method may be even more expensive than evaluating
the queries individually.
Alternatively, the group optimizer can push down the selection
operator (e.g., on Industry) to avoid computing an expensive
join. First, the signature for the selection operator is matched
with an existing group. Then a file scan operator on the
intermediate file produced by the selection group is added and
the join operator is rewritten to use the intermediate file as one
of its inputs. Finally, the group optimizer incrementally groups
the join operation using its signature. Compared to the first
approach, this approach may create many join groups with
significant overlap between them. Note, however, that this same
overlap exists in the non-grouping approach. Thus, in general,
this method always outperforms than non-grouping approach.
The group optimizer will select one of these two strategies based
on a cost model. To date we have implemented the second
approach in NiagaraCQ. In the future we plan on implementing
the first strategy and compare the performance of the two
approaches.