So far, we have discussed methods for effective visualization
of the changes occurring in the data stream. An
additional useful ability is to be able to concisely diagnose
specific trends in given spatial locations. For example, a
user may wish to know particular spatial locations in the
data at which the data is being reduced, those at which the
data is increasing, and those from where the data is shifting
to other locations. In order to provide further insight, we
introduce the following definitions:
Definition 4.1. A data coagulation for time slice t and user
defined threshold min-coag is defined to be a connected region
R in the data space, so that for each point X 2 R, we have
Thus, a data coagulation is a connected region in the data
which has velocity density larger than a user-defined noise
threshold of min-coag. In terms of the temporal velocity
profile, these are the connected regions in the data with
elevations larger than min-coag. Note that there may be
many such elevated regions in the data, each of which may
be disconnected from one another. Each such region is a
separate area of data coagulation, since they cannot be
connected by a continuous path above the noise threshold.
For each such elevated region, we would also have a local
peak, which represents the highest density in that locality.
Definition 4.2. The epicenter of a data coagulation R at time
slice t is defined to be a spatial location X such that X 2 R
and for any 
As with the other results of this paper, we use the grid
discretization to provide a good approximation of the
different shift regions and epicenters. We shall call the
smallest rectangular grid area created by the grid discretization
to be an elementary bounding rectangle. In the first
step, we find all the elementary bounding rectangles so that
all four corners of this bounding rectangle have a velocity
density which is is larger than min-coag. In the next step, we
create connected components out of all such rectangles
found. Two rectangles are said to be connected, if they share
at least one common boundary. The entire region thus
found is said to be a region of coagulation. We have
illustrated one such region of coagulation in Fig. 6 and have,
in fact, shaded the resulting bounded region.
Once the regions of coagulation have been determined,
the epicenter is found in a straightforward way by finding
the grid point inside the coagulation region whose density
is the highest. This is used as the approximation to the local
peak of the temporal velocity profile within that region. The
concept of data dissolution and its epicenter are similarly
defined as follows:
Definition 4.3. A data dissolution for time slice t and user
defined threshold min-dissol is defined to be a connected region
R in the data space, so that for each point, we have
Just as a data coagulation refers to a connected elevation
in the temporal velocity profile, a data dissolution refers to
a connected valley in the temporal velocity profile.
Correspondingly, we define the epicenter of a data
dissolution as follows
Definition 4.4. The epicenter of a data dissolution R at time slice
t is defined to be a spatial location X such that X 2 R and
for any 
A region of data dissolution and its epicenter is
calculated in an exactly analogous way to the epicenter of
a data coagulation. It now remains to discuss how
significant shifts in the data can be detected. Many of the
epicenters of coagulation and dissolution are connected in a
way which results in a funneling of the data from the
epicenters of dissolution to the epicenters of coagulation.
When this happens, it is clear that the two phenomena of
dissolution and coagulation are connected to one another.
We refer to such a phenomenon as a global data shift. The
detection of such shifts can be useful in many problems
involving mobile objects. How to find whether a pair of
epicenters are connected in this way? In order to detect such
a phenomenon we use the intuition derived from the use of
the spatial velocity profiles. Let us consider a directed line
drawn from an epicenter to data dissolution to an epicenter
of data coagulation. In order for this directed line to be
indicative of a global data shift, the spatial velocity profile
should be such that the directions of a localized shifts along
each of the points in this directed line should be in roughly
in the same direction as the line itself. If at any point on this
directed line, the direction of the localized shift is in an
opposite direction, then it is clear that the these two
epicenters are disconnected from one another. In order to
facilitate further discussion, we will refer to the line
connecting two epicenters as a potential shift line.
Recall that the spatial velocity profiles provide an idea of
the spatial movements of the data over time. In order to
calculate the nature of the data shift, we would need to
calculate the projection of the spatial velocity profiles along
this potential shift line. In order to do so without scanning
the data again, we use the grid points which are closest to
this shift line in order to obtain an approximation of the
shift velocities at various points along this line. The first
step is to find all the elementary rectangles which are
intersected by the shift line. Once these rectangles have
been found we determine the grid points corresponding to
the corners of these rectangles. These are the grid points at
which the spatial velocity profiles are examined. An
example of such a set of grid points are marked by “x” in
the right-hand diagram of Fig. 6.
Let the set of n grid points thus discovered be denoted by
Y1Yn. Then, the corresponding spatial velocities at these
grid points at time slice t are the unit vector in the direction of the shift line. We assume
that this vector is directed from the region of dissolution to
the area of coagulation. Then, the projections of the spatial
velocities in the direction of the shift line are given by
We shall refer to these values as
p1 . . . pn, respectively. For a shift line to expose an actual
movement of the data, the values of p1 . . . pn must all be
substantially positive. In order to quantify this notion, we
introduce a user-defined parameter called min-vel. A
potential shift line is said to be a valid shift when each of
values p1 . . . pn is larger than min-vel. The corresponding
algorithm is illustrated in Fig. 7.
Thus, in order to determine all of the possible data shifts,
we first find all coagulation and dissolution epicenters for
user-defined parameters min-coag and min-dissol, respectively.
Then, we find all the potential shift lines by
connecting each dissolution epicenter to a coagulation
epicenter. For each such shift line, we find the grid points
which are closest to it using the criteria discussed above.
Finally, for each of these grid points, we determine the
projection of the corresponding shift velocities along this
line and check whether each of them is at least min-vel. If so,
then this direction is reported as a valid shift line.