We use both synthetic data sets and real data sets in the
experiments. The generation of the synthetic data sets is
controlled by the parameters listed in Table 1.
The dimension number d is the number of attributes of
the points, while the data size Size is the number of points
in the data set. There are three optional distributions in
the synthetic data sets: Correlated, Independent and Anti-
Correlated. In the correlated data set, all dimensions are
positively correlated to each other. As such, there are very
few skyline points, free or k-dominant, in the data set. In
the independent data set, dimensions are independent of
each other. Under this assumption, points rarely dominate
each other when the dimension number grows, so the free
skyline set becomes large. In the anti-correlated data set,
dimensions are negatively correlated. Almost all points are
free skyline points in this type of data sets. In Table 2,
we show the number of the dominant skyline points on a
15-dimensional data set with 100K points on different distributions
and different constraint parameter k. This table
shows that when k is close to dimension number d, the number
of dominant skyline point in the anti-correlated data
set is much larger than that in the independent and correlated
data sets. However, when k is small, the correlated
data set can still have some dominant skyline points, while
no dominant skyline points can be found on the other two
distributions. The constraint parameter k, w and the top
dominant skyline parameter δ have the same meaning as
that described in the paper. When we assign weights to the
dimensions, we ensure that the sum of the weights on all
dimensions is equal to the number of dimensions. In the
weight generation, we use the ratio of maximum weight to
minimum weight, R, to control the degree of bias on the
weights. Given the ratio R, the d weights of the dimensions
are generated by normalizing d random numbers between 1
and R.
We also study two different real data sets. The first is
the NBA statistics data set4. This data set contains 17000
players’ season records on 17 attributes from the first season
of NBA in 1945. Every record contains the statistical
value of a player’s performance in one season, such as
game played(GP), points(PT), rebounds(RB) and so on.
One player may have several records if he played in NBA
for more than one season. The second data set is Movie-
Lens data set5, which contains 100,000 ratings (1-5) from
943 users on 1682 movies. The data was collected by the
MovieLens web site from September 1997 to April 1998. All
the users in this data set has rated at least 20 movies. To
make the records comparable, we insert 0 to all the empty
entries of the movies a user did not rate.
All the experiments are conducted on a PC with Intel
Pentium 2.4GHz CPU and 2G main memory, running Linux
with kernel 6.2.14.