The dominant skyline problem so far gives every dimension
equal importance in the result. This may not be enough
in all the cases, since sometimes the user may want to give
some bias to some attributes of greater interest. A simple
extension from the original problem is to assign some
weights to the dimensions and determine the (dominant)
skyline points over some subset of dimensions with enough
weights. In the basketball players’ statistics data, for example,
the user may want to find those exceptional players who
are better at defense than attack, by giving more weight to
defensive attributes, such as block and steal.
To support this type of weighted query, our previous algorithms
need to be extended only slightly. Specifically, when
comparing two points p1 and p2, we record the weights of
the dimensions on which p1 dominates p2 and sum them up.
If the sum exceeds a threshold w, we say that p1 dominates
p2 with weight w. A point p is said to be a w-dominant skyline
if no point can dominate p on dimensions whose weight
sum is over w. The following lemma shows that weighted
dominant skyline shares similar properties as the original
dominant skyline.

From the simple lemma above, we can restate almost all
of the earlier theorems in a weighted form. Since the onescan
and two-scan algorithms are based on point comparison,
the weight assignments for the dimensions have no
impact on its correctness. The structure of these two algorithms
remain largely unchanged and only the pair-wise
domination comparison procedure must be modified to cater
to the weights. For the sorted retrieval method, instead of
counting the number of times a point has been processed
from the sorted arrays, we need to sum up all the weights
of the processed dimensions.
Note that these modification do not affect the computational
complexities of all the proposed methods. However,
having weight assignments on the dimensions can impact the
effectiveness of the pruning and the frequency distribution
of w-dominant skyline points with varying w. We will show
how these affect the running time of the algorithms in our
experimental study.