We consider a sensor network, which consists of a set of sensor nodes placed in a 2D plane. Sensors
may be arranged as a regular or irregular network, as shown in Fig. 1. However, unless otherwise
stated, throughout the discussion we will assume a triangular network as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), our
framework should be easily extended to other regular, or even irregular, networks (this will be commented
in Section 3-3). In order to track objects’ routes, each sensor is aware of its physical location
as well as the physical locations of its neighboring sensors. Each sensor has sensing capability as well
as computing and communication capabilities, so as to execute protocols and exchange messages.
Each sensor is able to detect the existence of nearby moving objects. We assume that the sensing
scope is r, which is equal to the side length of the triangles 1. Within the detectable distance, a sensor
is able to determine its distance to an object. This can be achieved either by the fly time or signal
strength that are transmitted by the object, or of the signals that are transmitted by the sensor and
reflected by the object.
We assume that three sensors are sufficient to determine the location of an object. Specifically,
suppose that an object resides within a triangle formed by three neighboring sensors S1, S2, and S3
and that the distances to the object detected by these sensors are r1, r2, and r3, respectively. As
shown in Fig. 2(a), by the intersections of the circles centered at S1 and S2, two possible positions of
the object can be determined. With the assistance of S3, the precise position can be determined. (It
should be noted that in practice errors may exist, and thus more sensors will be needed to to improve
the accuracy.)
The goal of this work is to determine the roaming path of a moving object in the sensor network.
The trace of the object should be reported to a location server from time to time, depending on whether
this is a real-time application or not. The intersection of the sensing scopes of three neighboring
sensors is as shown in Fig. 2(b). We further divide the area into one working area A0 and three
backup areas A1,A2, and A3. Intuitively, the working area defines the scope where these three
sensors work normally, while the backup areas specify when “handover” should be taken.