Our location-tracking protocol is derived by the cooperation of sensors. Whenever an object is detected,
an election process will be conducted by some nearby sensors to choose a sensor, on which
an agent will be initiated, to monitor the roaming behavior of the object. As the object moves, the
agent may migrate to a sensor that is closer to the object to keep on monitoring the object. Fig. 3
illustrates this concept, where the dash line is the roaming path of the object, and arrows are the migration
path of the agent. By so doing, the computation and communication overheads can be reduced
significantly.
Recall that positioning an object requires the cooperation of at least three sensors. The mobile
agent, called the master, will invite two neighboring sensors to participate by dispatching a slave agent
to each of them. These three agents (master and slaves) will cooperate to perform the trilateration
algorithm [1]. From time to time, the slaves will report their sensing results to the master agent,
who will then calculate the object’s precise locations. As the object moves, these slave agents may
be revoked and reassigned. Certain signal strength thresholds will be used to determine when to
revoke/reassign a slave agent. The details will be given later. In Fig. 3, those sensors that ever host
a slave agent are marked by black. We comment that although our development is based on the
cooperation of two slave agents, it will be straightforward to extend our work to more slave agents
to improve the positioning accuracy. To reduce the amount of data to be carried on, a master may
decide to forward some tracking histories to the location server. This issue will be further addressed
in Section 4.
We now discuss how slave agents are revoked and reassigned. Observe the top part of Fig. 3.
Figure 3: Roaming path of an object (dash line) and the migration path of the corresponding master
agent (arrows). Sensors that ever host a slave agent are marked by black.
When resident in the working area A0, the object is tracked by sensors S0, S1, and S2. On entering
the backup area A1, since the signals received by S2 will reduce to a level below a threshold, the slave
agent at S2 will be revoked and a new slave will be issued to S6. Similarly, on entering the backup
area F1, the slave at S1 will be revoked, and a new one will be issued to S5. As the object passes S5,
the master itself will lose the target, in which case the master will migrate itself to S5. All old slaves
will be revoked and new slaves will be invited.
When an object is in the backup areas of some sensors, it is possible that it can be sensed by more
than three sensors. To reduce the sensing overheads, master and slave agents can inhibit other irrelevant
sensors from monitoring the object. This concept is illustrated in Fig. 4. The object is currently
in area A0. Sensors S3, S4, . . . , S11, which may sometimes detect the object, will be inhibited from
tracking this object by warning signals that are issued periodically by the agents in S0, S1, and S2.