In order to construct the velocity profiles, we need a way of
picking a reasonable set of coordinates for plotting the data.
The discretized version of the velocity density is used for
this purpose. We pick a total of  coordinates along each
dimension. For a two-dimensional system, this corresponds
to 2 spatial coordinates. The higher the value of , the
better the resolution for the visualization system; on the
other hand, the computational requirements are greater.
First, the velocity density is calculated at each of these 2
points. The temporal velocity profile can be calculated by a
simple  additive operations per data point.
Let us say that it has been decided to calculate the
temporal velocity profile in the interva Then, for
each coordinate Xg in the grid, we maintain two sets of
counters (corresponding to forward and reverse density
counters) which are updated as each point in the data
stream is received. When a data point Xi is received at time
ti, then we add the value to the
forward density counter, and the value to the reverse density counter 
for
At the end of time t, the values computed for each
coordinate at the grid need to be normalized. The process of
normalization is the same for either the forward or the
reverse density profiles. In each case, we sum up the total
value in all the 2 counter, and divide each counter by this
total. Thus, for the normalized coordinates, the sum of the
values over all the coordinates will be equal to 1. This is
analogous1 to the requirement expressed in (4).
Successive sets of temporal profiles are generated at
user-defined time-intervals of of ht. In order to ensure
online computation, the smoothing parameter vector hs for
the time-interval must be available at time T 
ht as soon as the first data point of that interval is scheduled
to arrive. Therefore, we need a way of estimating this vector
using the data from past intervals. In order to generate the
velocity density for the interval the spatial
kernel smoothing vector hs is determined using the
Silverman’s approximation for Gaussian kernels
on the set of data points which arrived in the interval