B. Challenges
Although privacy preservation in data publishing has been
studied extensively and several important models such as k-
anonymity [5] and l-diversity [6] as well as many efficient
algorithms have been proposed, most of the existing studies
can deal with relational data only. Those methods cannot be
applied to social network data straightforwardly.
As elaborated in Section I-A, privacy may be leaked if a
social network is released improperly to public. In practice, we
need a systematic method to anonymize social network data
before it is released. However, anonymizing social network
data is much more challenging than anonymizing relational
data on which most of the previous work focuses.
First, it is much more challenging to model the background
knowledge of adversaries and attacks about social network
data than that about relational data. On relational data, it is often
assumed that a set of attributes serving a quasi-identifier is
used to associate data from multiple tables, and attacks mainly
come from identifying individuals from the quasi-identifier.
However, in a social network many pieces of information
can be used to identify individuals, such as labels of vertices
and edges, neighborhood graphs, induced subgraphs, and their
combinations. It is much more complicated and much more
difficult than the relational case.
Second, it is much more challenging to measure the information
loss in anonymizing social network data than that in
anonymizing relational data. Typically, the information loss
in an anonymized table can be measured using the sum of
information loss in individual tuples. Given one tuple in the
original table and the corresponding anonymized tuple in the
released table, we can calculate the distance between the two
tuples to measure the information loss at the tuple level.
However, a social network consists of a set of vertices and a set
of edges. It is hard to compare two social networks by comparing
the vertices and edges individually. Two social networks
having the same number of vertices and the same number of
edges may have very different network-wise properties such
as connectivity, betweenness, and diameter. Thus, there can
be many different ways to define the measures of information
loss and anonymization quality.
Last but not least, it is much more challenging to devise
anonymization methods for social network data than for
relational data. Divide-and-conquer methods are extensively
applied to anonymization of relational data due to the fact
that tuples in a relational table are separable in anonymization.
In other words, anonymizing a group of tuples does not
affect other tuples in the table. However, anonymizing a
social network is much more difficult since changing labels
of vertices and edges may affect the neighborhoods of other
vertices, and removing or adding vertices and edges may
affect other vertices and edges as well as the properties of
the network.