Computer scientists are used to studying access control
mechanisms where one's identity determines what one is au-
thorized to do. However, in the physical world, identity is
not the only thing that matters: often, the physical location
of the requester also plays an important role in determining
access rights. This suggests studying location-based access
control.
This work was supported in part by DARPA NEST con-
tract F33615-01-C-1895, NSF CCR-0113941, and an equip-
ment donation from Intel.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
WiSE’03, September 19, 2003, San Diego, California, USA.
Copyright 2003 ACM 1581137699/
03/0009 ...$5.00.
Location-based access control in the physical world is easy,
natural, and familiar. For example, being able to turn on or
o the lights in a particular room requires having a physical
presence in the room. The very design of the light switch
is what enforces the security policy. In contrast, achieving
the same kind of guarantee with information systems, such
as wireless networks, is less straightforward; it is not simply
a matter of putting a switch in the right place. To en-
force location-based access control policies on information
resources, we need a way to perform location verication,
where a principal's location is securely veried to meet cer-
tain criteria: e.g., being inside a particular room or a specic
building.
Location verication enables location-based access con-
trol. Once a principal's location has been veried using
a protocol for location verication, the principal can be
granted access to a particular resource according to the de-
sired policy. This approach is naturally combined with phys-
ical security; guards or locks might be used to determine who
is allowed to enter a building, then location verication em-
ployed to allow wireless access to all those inside. In this
way, the location verication problem is the key technical
challenge that must be surmounted to implement location-
based access control.
Location-based access control has several benets. Most
importantly, it is natural for many applications. One sim-
ple policy might allow wireless control of only the lights for
the room you are in, or might insist that a company server
cease operating if it is taken outside the building. In ad-
dition, using location for access control obviates the need
to establish shared secrets in advance. Visitors to a build-
ing need not obtain wireless encryption keys prior to their
visit; instead, the keys could be granted automatically to
all physical occupants of the building. Likewise, at the ball-
park, fans at a baseball game could receive live scorecards
on their wireless devices, while stadium owners could restrict
this service to only those actually present in the stadium.
It would be quite cumbersome to distribute new keys to all
fans attending each game, but location-based access con-
trol allows bootstrapping o the existing physical security
measures controlling entry to the premises.
In this paper, we study the location verication problem.
First, we introduce and dene the location verication prob-
lem in a careful way (Section 2). Then, we propose a new
protocol for location verication, called the Echo protocol
(Section 3), and we prove its security (Section 4). This work
provides a foundation for securely using location in wireless
information systems.