Here, I will introduce a few choices of parameters that
were fixed in the experiments.
First, we assume that each peer truthfully creates and
manages its own profile, i.e. profiles are accessible at one
point (namely their source) and not shared throughout the
community.
This assumption allows for the most important simplification
that is being made in this work: in an attempt to
study the query routing problem in isolation – independent
of overlay topology – we only evaluate a DIR scenario, no
real P2PIR simulation is performed. Equivalently, we could
say that we assume the overlay network to be a complete
graph, i.e. each peer has complete knowledge of all other
peers’ addresses and profiles (as in [9]).
Apart from the wish to decouple neighbour selection and
query routing, this decision is expected to help reduce the
number of free parameters considerably: when trying to simulate
a P2P community, we need to make assumptions regarding
not only the topology of the overlay network, but
also the distribution of queries among peers, whether or not
forwarding to more than one peer is allowed, churn (i.e.
whether or not a contacted peer is on-line or not) etc.
However, the claim is made that the results obtained in
the experiments below are valid not only for DIR, but also
(and even more so) for P2PIR. In fact, by not committing to
particular settings of P2PIR parameters, we can expect the
results obtained to be valid across a large number of P2PIR
systems with very different settings of these parameters.
On the one hand, the above claim is based on the assumption
that a query routing algorithm that performs well in a
situation where all peers’ profiles are known – i.e. in DIR
– will also do so when applied to only a subset of these –
as is typically the case in P2PIR. On the other hand, care
is taken to design characteristics of the DIR simulation in a
way that is typical for P2PIR scenarios – as opposed to DIR
scenarios:
‧ Profiles are pruned (with varying sizes). This is untypical
in DIR because there are normally no size restrictions
for resource descriptions.
‧ In DIR, evaluations usually use at most a few hundred
information resources, in P2PIR we want to use far
more peers, at least a few thousand.
‧ While information resources in DIR are normally large
and semantically heterogenous, peers can be expected
to share a smaller amount of documents belonging only
to a few selected topics (where the exception of a few
very large and heterogeneous peers proves the rule).