The rapid progress of wireless communication and embedded micro-sensing MEMS technologies
have made wireless sensor networks possible. Such environments may have many inexpensive wireless
nodes, each capable of collecting, processing, and storing environmental information, and communicating
with neighboring nodes. In the past, sensors are connected by wire lines. Today, this
environment is combined with the novel ad hoc networking technology to facilitate inter-sensor communication
[8]. The flexibility of installation and configuration is greatly improved. A flurry of
research activities have recently been commenced in sensor networks.
With sensor networks, the physical world can interact with the internet more closely. Grouping
thousands of sensors together may revolutionize information gathering. For example, a disaster detector
may be set up so that temperatures of a forest can be monitored by sensors to prevent small
harmless brush fires from becoming monstrous infernos. Similar techniques can be applied to flood
and typhoon detection. Another application is environment control; sensors can monitor factors such
as temperature and humidity and feed these information back to a central air conditioning and ventilation
system. By attaching sensors on vehicles, roads, and traffic lights, traffic information can be
fed back to the traffic control center immediately. Location-based services can be combined with
sensor networks. We can dispatch a mobile agent following a person to provide on-site services (such
applications might be attractive for disability people who have such as hearing or visual problems).
Sensors may also be used in combination with GPS to improve positioning accuracy. However, many
issues remain to be resolved for the success of sensor networks.
‧ Scalability: Since a sensor network typically comprises a large number of nodes, how to
manage these resources and information is not an easy job. Distributed and localized algorithms
are essential in such environments [1, 6, 7]. Also, scalability is a critical issue in handling the
related communication problems. In [17, 18, 19], the coverage and exposure of an irregular
sensor network are formulated as computational geometry problems. This coverage problem
is related to the Art Gallery Problem and can be solved optimally in a 2D plane, but is shown
to be NP-hard in the 3D case [10]. Regular placement of sensors and their sensing ability are
discussed in [4] and [13].
‧ Stability: Since sensors are likely to be installed in outdoor or even hostile environments, it
is reasonable to assume that device failures would be regular and common events. Protocols
should be stable and fault-tolerant.
‧ Power-saving: Since no plug-in power is available, sensor devices will be operated by battery
powers. Energy conservation should be kept in mind in all cases. Energy consumption of
communications might be a major factor. Techniques such as data fusion may be necessary [3],
but the timeliness of data should be considered too. Data dissemination is investigated in [5].
Mobile agent-based solutions are sometimes more power-efficient [9].
Since sensor networks are typically used to monitor the environment, one fundamental issue is the
location-tracking problem, whose goal is to trace the roaming paths of moving objects in the network
area [15, 20, 11, 16, 14]. This problem is similar to the location-update problem in PCS networks, but
is more challenging in two senses: (1) there are no central control mechanism and backbone network
in such environment, and (2) the wireless communication bandwidth is very limited. In this paper, we
propose a novel protocol based on the mobile agent paradigm. Once a new object is detected, a mobile
agent will be initiated to track the roaming path of the object. The agent is mobile since it will choose
the senor closest to the object to stay. In fact, the agent will follow the object by hopping from sensor
to sensor. The agent may invite some nearby slave sensors to cooperatively position the object and
inhibit other irrelevant (i.e., farther) sensors from tracking the object. Using mobile agents may have
two advantages. First, the sensing, computing, and communication overheads can be greatly reduced.
In this work, we will address the delivery and fusion of the tracking results [21]. Second, on-site
or follow-me services may be provided by mobile agents. Our prototyping of the location-tracking
mobile agent based on IEEE 802.11b NICs and our experimental experiences are also reported.
The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 describes our network model and defines
the location-tracking problem. Our protocol based on mobile agents is presented in Section 3. Fusion
and delivery of tracking history are discussed in Section 4. Our prototyping experiences and some
simulation results are given in Section 5. Section 6 draws our conclusions.