To verify the advantage of using our agent-based approach, we have developed a simulator. Sensors
are deployed in a 10,000m x 10,000m environment with triangular topology. The distance between
two neighboring sensors is 80m. The gayeway is located at the center of the network. Each control
packet is 2 bytes. Each location is represented by 2 bytes. The IP routing header is assumed, wtih
each header equal to 2 bytes and MTU as large as 500 bytes.
The Random Way Point Model [12] is used to simulate the mobility of objects. The initial locations
of objects are chosen randomly. Each object alternates between moving and pausing states. On
entering the moving state, the object’s next destination is randomly chosen from (x ± 15, y ± 15),
where (x, y) is its current location. Note that locations outside the boundary are not considered.
Under moving state, the object moves at a constant speed of an uniform distribution between 13
m/sec. After arriving at its destination, the object will pause a period with an exponential distribution
of mean = 5 sec.
We first experiment on different threshold values of T for the TB strategy. The result is in
Fig. 20(a). We measure the average traffic load. A T significantly less than the largest MTU is
not good due to high packet header overheads. On the contrary, tuning T too large is also inefficient
because the master agent will need to carry too much history while traveling. The figure suggests
that a T equal to or slightly larger than the largest MTU would be a good choice. Fig. 20(b) further
demonstrates the effect of the fusion factor . We compare different strategies. The DB strategy
performs the best. The TB also performs very well, if proper T can be selected. In all cases, NAB
performs the worst.
In the Fig. 21(a), we change the network size to visualize the effect. It is reasonable that larger
networks incur higher traffics due to longer delivery paths. This justifies the importance of using
our agent-based strategies. In Fig. 21(b), we further vary the mobility ratio, which is defined to be
the ratio of moving time to pausing time. A higher mobility ratio indicates more frequent change
of master agents. DB and TB with lower thresholds are less sensitive to mobility. With a too large
threshold, TB will degrade significantly because the overhead for agents to carry tracking results
would be significant as the mobility ratio increases.
To summarize, we conclude that DB performs well in all cases. TB is quite simple, but one needs
to be cautious in choosing its threshold. These strategies outperform NAB by 6080% in terms of
average traffic load.