In the One-Scan algorithm, free skyline points (i.e., T)
need to be maintained to compute the k-dominant skyline
points. Since the set of free skyline points could be much
larger than the set of k-dominant skyline points, maintaining
T can incur large space and computation overhead. To
overcome this limitation, we present our second approach
(shown in Algorithm 2) which avoids the need to maintain
T by scanning D twice.
In the first scan of D (steps 1 to 10), a set of candidate
k-dominant skyline points, R, is computed progressively by
comparing each point  against the computed points in
R. If a point  is k-dominated by p, then p

is removed
from R. At the end of the comparison against R, p is added
into R if it is not k-dominated by any point in R. After
the first scan of D, R contains the candidate k-dominant
skyline points. Recall that false positives can exist in R due
to property P2 in Lemma 4.1.
To eliminate the false positives produced by the first scan,
a second scan of D (steps 11 to 14) is necessary. To determine
whether a point  is indeed k-dominant, it is
sufficient to compare p
against each point  that
occurs earlier than p
in D, since those points that occur
later than p
in D have been already compared against p
in the first scan. Note that this optimization can be implemented
by associating each point with its position in D, and
using this information to avoid unnecessary comparisons.
The efficiency of the Two-Scan approach is dependent on
how effective are the k-dominant points in pruning non-
dominant skyline points during the first scan. If the number
of false positives produced by the first scan is small, then
the performance of the second scan and hence the overall approach
will be good. The following result gives an indication
of the pruning ability of dominant skyline points.
Theorem 4.2. Consider a d-dimensional data set D with
more than 2d points such that the dimensions are pairwise
independent, and no two points in D have the same value
for the same dimension. If a data point  can not kdominate
any point in D, then p is a k-dominant skyline
point with probability less than.
The above theorem shows that when k is small enough, it
is very unlikely that a dominant skyline point does not kdominate
some other point. Thus, this indicates that each
k-dominant skyline is likely to prune off many false positives
during the first scan of D. For example, when k , the
above probability is smaller than . For d = 20, this
probability works out to be , which is a very
small number.
Example 4.2 Applying the Two-Scan algorithm (with k =
4) on the data set D in Fig. 1, we note that both p1 and p2
(which are indeed 4-dominant skyline points) will be inserted
into R at the end of the first scan regardless of the order
of the points in D. This example demonstrates the effective
pruning ability of the dominant skyline points in eliminating
non-dominant skyline points.