In the nal iteration of the protocol, we introduce multiple
verier nodes in an attempt to increase the coverage of R.
Recall that if R is not a circle, no single node can provide
100% coverage. Consequently, multiple veriers are needed.
Intuitively, we will run the protocol presented in Section 3.2
after selecting one verier from among the set of veriers V .
The protocol is quite simple. See Figure 6 for the com-
plete denition. First, a verier is chosen so that the claimed
location ` lies within that verier's ROA. If no such verier
exists, execution is aborted, since the claim can not be ver-
ied. After choosing a verier v to participate, v sends a
packet to p using RF, which is echoed back to it using ultra-
sound. v can calculate how long it should take to hear the
echo, namely, the sum of the time it takes to reach ` using
RF, plus p, plus the time it takes for a return packet to go
from ` to v using ultrasound. If the measured elapsed time
exceeds this anticipated time, v rejects the location claim.
The nonce in the packet prevents the prover from sending a
reply before it has received the outgoing RF packet.
The extra verier nodes serve to expand the region of
acceptance within R. Thus, while ROA(v;p) refers to the
region that one particular verier node can accept, we dene
ROA(p) to be the region where at least one verier node
can prove location claims. It is then clear that
Figure 6: Formal description of the Echo protocol,
which can perform location verication in an arbi-
trary region R with multiple verier nodes. We rep-
resent the prover node as p and the verier node
that runs the protocol as v.
since the set of veriers can accept a location proof if the
claimed location is inside at least one verier's region of
acceptance.
In the Echo protocol, the infrastructure chooses a single
verier node to participate in the protocol. A verier v may
participate if ` 2 ROA(v;p), since by denition that is the
region that it can perform secure location verication proofs.
Note that the claimed location ` may be inside ROA(v;p)
for many dierent verier nodes v, hence more than one ver-
ier node might be eligible for participation in the protocol.
We only require one to be chosen, and we allow the ver-
iers to use any convenient leader election mechanism for
choosing which particular verier node will run the proto-
col. They may have a purely deterministic mechanism for
electing veriers, or they may use a dynamic algorithm in
an attempt to conserve power, for example.