
In the first set of experiments, we compare the performance of the TAG in network approach to centralized approaches on queries for the different classes of aggregates discussed in Section 3.2. Centralized aggregates have the same communications cost irrespective of the aggregate function, since all data must be routed to the root. For this experiment, we compared this cost to the number of bytes required for distributive aggregates (MAX and COUNT), an algebraic aggregate (AVERAGE), a holistic aggregate (MEDIAN), a content-sensitive aggregate (HISTOGRAM), and a unique aggregate (COUNT DISTINCT); the results are shown in Figure 4.
Values in this experiment represent the steady-state cost to extract an additional aggregate from the network once the query has been propagated; the cost to flood a request down the tree in not considered.
In our 2500 node (d = 0) network, MAX and COUNT have the same cost when processed in the network, about 5000bytes per epoch(total overall nodes), since theyboth send just a single integer per partial state record; similarly AVERAGE requires just two integers, and thus always has double the cost of the distributive aggregates. MEDIAN costs the same as a centralized aggregate, about 90000 bytes per epoch, which is significantly more expensive
than other aggregates, especially for larger networks, as parents have to forward all of their children’s values to the root. COUNT DISTINCT is only slightly less expensive (73000 bytes), as there are few duplicate sensor values; a less uniform sensor-value distribution would reduce the cost of this aggregate. For the HISTOGRAM aggregate, we set the size of the fixed-width buckets to be 10; sensor values ranged over the interval [0..1000]. At about 9000 messages per epoch, HISTOGRAM provides an ef?cient means for extracting a density summary of readings from the network.
Note that the benfit of TAG will be more or less pronounced depending on the topology. In a flat, single-hop environment,where all motes are directly connectedto the root, TAG is no better than the centralized approach. For a topology where n motes are arranged in a line, centralized aggregates will require 4 U  partial state records to be transmitted, whereas TAG will require only n2/2 records.
Thus, we have shown that, for our simulation topology, in network aggregation can reduce communication costs by an order of magnitude over centralized approaches, and that, even in the worst case (such as with MEDIAN), it provides performance equal to the centralized approach.