We conduct a series of experiments to evaluate the
effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method using
both real and synthetic datasets. In this paper, we compare
our proposed approach for k-dominant skyline against
TSA, which is the most efficient k-dominant skyline
search algorithm proposed in Ref. 6). The efficiency of
the TSA approach is dependent on how effective are the
k-dominant objects pruning non-dominant skyline points
during the first scan. If the number of false positives
produced by the first scan is small, then the performance
of the second scan and hence the overall approach will
be good.
The proposed algorithm works particularly well if
the k-dominant skyline is small. In the best case, the
algorithm terminates in one iterations; thus, the best case
complexity is of the order of O(n); n being the total
number of objects in dataset. In the worst case, the
complexity is of the order of O(n2). On the other hand,
TSA takes O(n2) to compute k-dominant skyline objects.
Though in the worst case the time complexity of our
proposed method is substantially the same as TSA, we can
drastically reduce comparisons for k-dominant skyline
computation by the domination power. TSADPI has the
tendency to fit into the best case complexity. Results of
all experiments support our claim that we can reduce
the number of comparisons drastically. Domination power
computation does not incur any additional cost in compare
with TSA. This is because TSA also sorted the whole
dataset in ascending order. However, for all experiments
we have included the time cost of domination power.
A. Performance on Synthetic Datasets
As benchmark synthetic datasets, we use the datasets
proposed in Ref. 2). Objects are generated using one of
the following three value distributions:
Anti-Correlated: an anti-correlated dataset represents an
environment in which, if an object has a small coordinate
on some dimension, it tends to have a large coordinate on
at least another dimension. As a result, the total number
of non-dominating objects of an anti-correlated dataset is
typically quite large.
Correlated: a correlated dataset represents an environment
in which objects with large coordinates in one
dimension are also have large coordinates in the other
dimensions. In a correlated dataset, few objects dominate
many other objects.
Independent: for this type of dataset, all attribute values
are generated independently using uniform distribution.
Under this distribution, the total number of nondominating
objects is between that of the correlated and
the anti-correlated datasets.
Details of the three distributions can be found in Ref.
2). To study the potential advantages of -domination
power on sort by sum, we evaluate comparisons of
TSADPI against TSA and compute the reduction rate.
The reduction rate is defined as
ReductionRate; 
where Comp. by TSADPI and Comp. by TSA are the
summation of all pairwise comparisons to compute k-
dominant skyline by TSADPI and TSA respectively. We
set n to 7, k to 6, and vary data cardinality from 100k
to 500k. From Table IV, we notice that the number of
comparisons of TSADPI is smaller than that of TSA and
the reduction rate varies from 25% to 45%.
In the following sections, we examined the effect of
dimensionality and cardinality.
Effect of Dimensionality. For this experiment, we vary
dataset dimensionality n ranges from 10 to 20 and k from
6 to 19. Figure 3(a), (b), and (c) represents the effect of
dimensionality. For all distributions the response time of
the proposed method is better than TSA approach and it
increases if the data dimensionality n increases.
Effect of Cardinality. For this experiment, we vary
dataset cardinality ranges from 100k to 500k and set the
values of n to 15 and k to 13. Figure 2(a), (b), and (c)
shows that when the size of the dataset increases from
100k to 500k, the computation time of both algorithms
maintain a positive correlation. Notice that our TSADP
performs better than TSA.
B. Performance on Real Datasets
To evaluate the performance for real dataset, we study
two different real datasets. The first dataset is NBA statistics.
It is extracted from “www.nba.com”. The dataset
contains 17k 13-dimensional data objects, which correspond
to the statistics of an NBA players’ performance
in 13 aspects (such as points scored, rebounds, assists,
etc.). The second dataset is FUEL dataset and extracted
from “www.fueleconomy.gov”. FUEL dataset is 24k
6-dimensional objects, in which each object stands for the
performance of a vehicle (such as mileage per gallon of
Figure 3. k-dom. skyline computation for different dimension
gasoline in city and highway, etc.). Using both datasets
we conduct the following experiment.
Experiments on Real Dataset for k-dominant Skyline.
We performed two experiments on NBA dataset. In
the first experiment, we study the effect of dimensionality
when n varies from 5 to 13 and k from 4 to 12.
Figure 4(a) shows the result. NBA dataset exhibits similar
result to synthetic dataset, if the number of dimension
increases the performance of both algorithms becomes
slower. Figure 4(a) represents that proposed method is
faster than TSA.
For FUEL dataset, we performed similar experiment
like NBA dataset. For this experiment, n varies from 3 to
6 and k varies from 2 to 5. Result is shown in Figure 4(b).
For this experiment with FUEL dataset, we obtain similar
result like NBA dataset that represents the scalability of
the proposed method.