In this paper, we have shown how decentralized and collaborative
mechanisms can efficiently complement existing
large-scale search systems. The objective is twofold: avoid
the typical bootstrap problem faced when designing distributed
variants of centralized system; and demonstrate that collaborative
approaches can provide added value and new services
for the users.
We have presented the basic architecture and building
blocks of a novel collaborative ranking service, which leverages
user-centric information such as interest profiling and
relevance tracking in order to return search results lists tailored
to the user interests. These results are expected to be
more relevant to the user that those returned by centralized
search mechanisms based only on structural or popularity
ranking. Result lists are based on the interest profile of the
user, and special care is taken to ensure that the system
keeps as much information diversity as possible to fulfill the
requests from large sets of different users.
Our work builds upon a solid, fully distributed and specially
designed P2P system. This system combines classical
key-based routing with an application specific storage layer,
as well as specifically designed load balancing mechanisms
that go beyond typical “blind” approaches used in other P2P
systems, by taking into account the specific needs and characteristics
of the storage layer.
We are currently evaluating our system on a prototype
implementation by observing its behavior along several metrics:
(1) quality of the produced results, both analytically
and based on sample user opinions, (2) overhead incurred by
using the system at the client and on the distributed system,
and (3) performance and flexibility of the load balancing,
routing, and storage layers. Our tests are performed using
both synthetic and real traces for both user-related behaviors
(queries and accesses) and system-related characteristics
(churn, failures, etc.). Deployment is being conducted both
in emulated networks and on PlanetLab.