THE NECI METASEARCH
ENGINE
Figure 1 shows a simplified control flow diagram
of the NECI metasearch engine, which consists of
two main parts: the metasearch code and a parallel
page retrieval daemon. The page retrieval engine is
relatively simple, but does incorporate features such
as queuing requests, load balancing from multiple
search processes, and delaying requests to the same
site to prevent overloading a site.
Figure 2 shows the main search form for the
NECI metasearch engine. Users can choose which
search engines to run, how many hits to retrieve,
the amount of context to display (measured in
number of characters), and so on. The engine supports
all common search formats, including
Boolean syntax. As with many other metasearch
engines, the NECI metasearch engine dynamically
modifies queries to match each search engine’s
query syntax.
Users can control the amount of text the NECI
engine displays by specifying the number of characters
it will show on either side of the query terms.
To improve readability, the engine omits most nonalphanumeric
characters and partial words at the
beginning and end of the specified character count.
At one point, we sought to improve context display
by extracting logical sentences rather than a fixed
number of characters. However, in general, users did
not find this sentence-based method superior
because including full sentences increased the screen
space needed by each summary without significantly
improving users’ ability to determine relevance.
Because the NECI engine returns results progressively
as it downloads and analyzes each page,
the results are not necessarily displayed in the order
listed by the individual search engines, but the order
is approximately the same. Perhaps because Web
search engines are not good at relevance ranking to
begin with, this difference in document ranking was
not a problem for users.
Figure 3 shows a sample response of the NECI
metasearch engine for the query “digital watermark.”
The bar at the top lets users switch between
views of the search results; below it are links to the
individual engine results. The “tip” that follows
might be query sensitive, such as providing specific
query format suggestions when the query looks
like a proper name.
The shaded bars to the left of the document titles
indicate how close query terms are to each other in
the document. With a single query term, the bar
shading indicates how close the term is to the top of
the document. The information to the right of the
document title shows which engine found the document
and the document’s age, for example, in the
first listing, “A” refers to AltaVista, “n/a” indicates
that the document’s age is not available.