In order to verify the feasibility of the proposed protocol, we have prototyped a system based on
IEEE 802.11b NICs. Signal strength is used as the criterion to position objects. Specifically, one
laptop equipped with a Lucent ORiNOCO 802.11b WaveLAN card is used to simulate an object. A
number of laptops, also equipped with IEEE 802.11b cards, are placed in triangular/square patterns
to emulate sensor nodes, as shown in Fig. 12. The object can roam around and will measure beacon
strengths transmitted from different sensors. For better accuracy, we average ten samples in one
second.
First, we measure the degradation of signal strength versus distance. Fig. 13 shows one set of
data that we collected. For every 5 meters from 0 to 100 meters a measurement is recorded. As can
be expected, signal strengths received from IEEE 802.11b are not very stable. We use the “regression
quadratic polynomial” to smooth out the curve, as illustrated by the solid line in Fig. 13. The curve is
used to convert a received signal strength to an estimated distance.
Since signal strength is not an accurate measurement, the aforementioned trilateration algorithm
can not be applied directly. In fact, as one may expect, signal strengths change all the time, even
under a motionless situation. Certain gaps inherently exist between estimated distances and actual
distances. The real situation is as shown in Fig. 14, where the three estimated circles centered at
sensors have no common intersection
To solve the problem, we propose an approximation algorithm as follows. Let A, B, and C be
the sensor nodes, which are located at (xA, yA), (xB, yB), and (xC, yC), respectively. For any point
(x, y) on the plane, we then define a difference function
where rA, rB, and rC are the estimated distances to A, B, and C respectively. The location of the
object is determined to be the point (x, y) among all points such that its difference function x,y is
minimized. In our experiment, we consider only integer grid points on the plane. We measure the
location of the object every second. Furthermore, to take sudden fluctuation of signal strength into
account, we enforce a condition that the object does not move faster than 5 meters per second. As a
result, when searching for the object’s location, only those points in (x ± 5, y ± 5) are evaluated for
their difference functions, where (x, y) represents the location in the previous measurement.
Our experiments were done in an outdoor, plain area with no obstacles. Two roaming paths as
illustrated in Fig. 12(a) were tested. For roaming path (1), three sets of results are shown in Fig. 15.
For roaming path (2), the results are demonstrated in Fig. 16. As can be seen, the predicted paths are
close to the actual roaming paths, but there are still large gaps yet remaining to be improved further.
We have also tested the arrangement in Fig. 12(b), where four sensors arranged as a square are
used. The extension for the tracking protocol and positioning algorithm is straightforward. Our tested
results are shown in Fig. 17 and Fig. 18.
A larger-scale experiment with 12 sensors is shown in the Fig. 19(a). With our agent-based
approach, the object is tracked by the four sensors with the strongest signals. The other distanced
sensors will be inhibited from monitoring the object (and thus reporting their tracking results). On
the contrary, if all sensors which can detect the object are allowed to track the object, the tracking
result will be as shown in Fig. 19(b). Surprisingly, the result shows that the positioning accuracy only
improves very slightly. We believe that this is because the signal strength from a distanced sensor is
typically very unstable. This usually enlarges the range of error. As a result, using our agent-based
approach not only reduces the amount of data being transmitted, but also remains the same level of
positioning accuracy.