Between RFID and these large gateways are wireless sensor networks. The devices in these networks typically consist of small, power-ef?cient, battery-powered nodes with low-range
radios and low-cost sensors. A typical class of devices are the Berkeley Motes, which incorporate an 8-bit, 7Mhz processor, a ChipCon CC1000 radio with a range of about 100 feet, 4KB of RAM, 128KB of program memory, and 512KB of off-chip non-volatile EEPROM. Motes accept a variety of sensor boards that provide the ability to sense magnetic ?eld, vibration, temperature, light, heat, humidity, air-pressure, and other environmental attributes. Figure 2 shows a diagram of a Berkeley “Mica” mote, next to a sensor board with light, temperature, magnetic ?eld, and acceleration sensors, as well as a piezo-electric buzzer. Such motes can be purchased from Crossbow Technology [18] for about $200.00, including a sensor board; prices have been dropping steadily since these devices were introduced about two years ago. Projections from one vendor [24] suggest that in the next two years, this class of devices should shrink in size to about 2 cubic mm (without batteries), and in cost to about $10.
Though these motes appear at ?rst to be only small, cheap versions of the ad-hoc nodes described above, they enable a surprisingly large class of new applications. Their low-cost and ease-of-deployment mean that they can be placed in spatially dense con?gurations throughout an area. The networking software that runs on these devices allows them to selfassemble into ad-hoc networks, such that data can be relayed across multiple hops and from long distances. The operating system software, called TinyOS [28], has been designed from the ground up with power-ef?cient sensing in mind, meaning that intelligent applications can easily run for months at a time off batteries that provide half the capacity of a AA cell. Although the technology is in its infancy, several scienti?c users are already seeing major gains in the ?eld from these devices. For example, we recently deployed a network of these devices for purposes of monitoring microclimates around redwood trees in the UC Berkeley Botanical Garden. The biologists involved are interested in the ways in which the trees take an active role in affecting temperature and humidity in the canopy around them[20]. Using a network of 30 motes on two trees, collecting readings every few minutes, we have been able to precisely illustrate how humidity and temperature varies at different levels of the trees. As we extend the net work with more sensors on more trees, we hope to observe other effects, such as the ways in which these environmental properties vary in different parts of the forest. Other recent sensor network applications include tracking vehicles within a ?eld of these sensors [44, 12], monitoring bird habitats on Great Duck Island, off the coast of Maine [39], monitoring vineyards [5], tracking animals in a wildlife refuge [33], and condition-based maintenance of fab equipments at Intel. None of these applications would have been possible with RFID or bulky, expensive nodes like Sensoria’s mGate.

