In this paper, we tackled the novel and important problem
of preserving privacy in social network data, and took an
initiative to combat neighborhood attacks. We modeled the
problem systematically and developed a practically feasible
approach. An extensive empirical study using both a real data
set and a series of synthetic data sets strongly indicated that
neighborhood attacks are real in practice, and our method is
highly feasible. Moreover, anonymized social networks can
still be used to answer aggregate queries accurately.
As social network data is much more complicated than
relational data, privacy preserving in social networks is much
more challenging and needs many serious efforts in the future.
Particularly, modeling adversarial attacks and developing
privacy preservation strategies are critical. For future work,
we believe that the following two types of attacks should be
addressed systematically.
We only handle 1-neighborhoods in this paper. It is very
interesting and could be desirable in some applications that
d-neighborhoods (d > 1) are protected. However, this will
introduce a serious challenge in computation. The neighborhood
size increases exponentially as d increases. Isomorphism
tests and anonymization of large neighborhoods are very
challenging.
A k-anonymous social network still may leak privacy. If
an adversary can identify a victim in a group of vertices
anonymized in a group, but all are associated with some
sensitive information, then the adversary still can know that
sensitive attribute of the victim. Some mechanism analogous
to l-diversity [6] should be introduced.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research is supported in part by an NSERC Discovery
Grant. All opinions, findings, conclusions and recommendations
in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.
We are grateful to Dr. Yufei Tao and the anonymous reviewers
for their informative comments which help to improve the
quality of the paper.