Many of the challenges of designing software for sensor networks have to do with the limited resources available in today’s sensor network hardware. In particular, processor speed, RAM, radio bandwidth, and energy capacity are all severely constrained on hardware like the Berkeley motes. Moore’s law suggests that memory density and processor speed will continue to grow at an exponential rate: in ten years, devices as large as a mote will have the processing power and storage of today’s server-class machines. However, neither energy density nor the energy costs of communication are expected to scale in this fashion; over the past ten years the energy density of commercially available batteries has changed only modestly – expensive, “high capacity” Lithium batteries sold for cameras and phones have only marginally greater energy densities than their alkaline counterparts [22, 23]; the real advantage of these batteries lies in extended lifetime under high-current drains such as charging the ?ash on a camera. Similarly, radio bandwidth is not expected to scale as dramatically as processor speed or RAM capacity. According to the Berkeley Wireless Radio Center’s (BWRC) PicoRadio project, it should eventually (at some unspeci?ed time in the future) be possible to build a 100μW radio transceiver (at 10% duty cycle), with a range of about 10 meters [43]. The current mote radio uses about 15mW when running in the 10m range, [13] when operating at 100% duty cycle, or about 1.5 mW at a 10% duty cycle. Thus, the difference in power consumption between a cheap, commercially available radio and the best the research community can conceive is about an order of magnitude. Though this reduction is signi?cant, it is not enough to eliminate concerns associated with the energy costs of communication, particularly given that the PicoRadio predictions hold only in low-channel-utilization, low-range environments and have yet to be demonstrated in practice. Thus, sensor networks will continue to be bandwidth and energy limited in the foreseeable future, so the research community needs to focus particularly on the challenges surrounding these resources.
