While Cricket has the attractive property that its decentralized beacon network is easy to con?gure and manage, it comes at the absence of explicit coordination. There is no explicit scheduling or coordination between the transmissions of different beacons that may be in close proximity, and listeners do not transmit any information to avoid compromising privacy. This lack of coordination can cause RF transmissions from different beacons to collide, and may cause a listener to wrongly correlate the RF data of one beacon with the ultrasonic signal of another, yielding false results. Furthermore, ultrasonic reception suffers from severe multipath effects caused by re?ections from walls and other objects, and these are orders of magnitude longer in time than RF multipath because of the relatively long propagation time for sound waves in air. In fact, this is one of the reasons it is hard to modulate data on the ultrasonic signal, which makes it a pure pulse. Thus, the listener’s task is to gather various RF and ultrasound (US) samples, deduce and correlate the {RF,US} pairs that were sent concurrently by the different beacons, and choose the space identi?er sent from the pair with the closest distance.
We decided not to implement a full-?edged carrier-sense-style channel-access protocol to avoid collisions in order to maintain simplicity and reduce overall energy consumption. Instead, we handle the problem of collisions using randomization. Rather than using a ?xed or deterministic transmission schedule, beacon transmission times are chosen randomly with a uniform distribution within an interval {R1,R2} ms. Thus, the broadcasts of different beacons are statistically independent, which avoids repeated synchronization and prevents persistent collisions. The choice of random interval is governed by the number of beacons we typically expect will be within range of each other and the time it takes for the transmitted information to reach the listeners, which depends on the message size and link bandwidth. In our implementation, weuse an average frequency of four times per second distributed in {150,350} ms. A smaller frequency increases the amount of time before a statistically signi?cant location inference can be made, while a higher frequency increases the probability of collisions. We plan to extend this technique to include a listening component that will allow each beacon to infer the number of beacons in its proximity and appropriately scale the beaconing frequency.
We minimize errors due to RF and ultrasonic interference among beacons by two methods: (i) proper selection of system parameters to reduce the chance of false correlations, and (ii) listener inference algorithms based on statistical analysis of correlated {RF,US} sam-ples.
