Sensor networks have attracted a tremendous amount of attention and media publicity from both the research community and industry. Many universities have started offering courses on sensor networks. A number of academic conferences and workshops have been created to enable publication in the area. Real world sensor networks have been deployed by several research groups [39, 9, 20]. In the industry, many large corporations (e.g., Intel, HP, Accenture, etc.), have started research projects around sensor networks, and a number of startup companies, such as Crossbow, Dust, Ember, and Millennial Net, have been formed in the last few years to sell sensornet hardware and software. Like many other communities, the database community has been drawn to this emerging space. SIGMOD 2004’s Call For Paper explicitly lists “embedded and self-organizing databases” as one of the areas of interest, presumably in direct reference to sensor networks. Research on streaming data, a topic related to sensor networks, is already being widely pursued in the database community today, with major theory and system-building efforts coming out of a number of groups. Most of these endeavors are predicated on the future proliferation of sensor devices, which will output data streams that need to be processed via continuous query engines. However, relatively few of these projects are actively involved with the researchers and engineers developing sensor devices and sensor network technology. In this paper, we examine a spectrum of sensing technologies, based on ongoing discussions and collaborations with sensor researchers at UC Berkeley and Intel Research, and with af?liated industrial groups. Using the evolution of sen
sor technology as a guide, we explain why the database community should get excited by sensor networks and illustrate opportunities where it can contribute to this emerging space. We include a summary of some of the initial successes at applying database techniques in this area and present some of the database research challenges that we foresee on the horizaon. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we present our spectrum sensing of scenarios and technology, discussing the differences in size, scale, and capabilities of different platforms for remote data collection and sensing. Section 3 then explains why recent changes in the sensor spectrum make database research more applicable than ever to this space and presents several research problems we believe to be particularly worthwhile given the novel challenges of sensor networks and skill set of the database community. Finally, Section 4 summarizes the lessons of the paper and concludes