The wireless sensor networks of the near future are envisioned to consist of hundreds to thousands of inexpensive wireless nodes, each with some computational power and sensing capability, operating in an unattended mode. They are intended for a broad range of environmental sensing applications from vehicle tracking to habitat monitoring [1, 8, 10]. The hardware technologies for these networks – low cost processors, miniature sensing and radio modules – are available today, with further improvements in cost and capabilities expected within the next decade [1, 5, 7, 8]. The applications, networking principles and protocols for these systems are just beginning to be developed [2, 4, 8, 11]. Sensor networks are quintessentially event-based systems. A sensor network consists of one or more “sinks” which subscribe to speci?c data streams by expressing interests or queries. The sensors in the network act as “sources” which detect environmental events and push relevant data to the appropriate subscriber sinks. For example, there may be a sink that is interested in a particular spatio-temporal phenomenon (“does the temperature ever exceed 70 degrees in
?This work was supported by the DARPA SensIT program.
area A between 10am and 11am ?”). During the given time interval all sensors in the corresponding spatial portion of the network act as event-based publishers. They publish information toward the subscribing sink if and when they detect the indicated phenomenon. Because of the requirement of unattended operation in remote or even potentially hostile locations, sensor networks are extremely energy-limited. However since various sensor nodes often detect common phenomena, there is likely to be some redundancy in the data the various sources communicate to a particular sink. In-network ?ltering and processing techniques can help to conserve the scarce energy resources. Data aggregation has been put forward as an essential paradigm for wireless routing in sensor networks [3, 6]. The idea is to combine the data coming from different sources enroute – eliminating redundancy, minimizing the number of transmissions and thus saving energy. This paradigm shifts the focus from the traditional address-centric approaches for networking (?nding short routes between pairs of addressable end-nodes) to a more data-centric approach (?nding routes from multiple sources to a single destination that allows in-network consolidation of redundant data). In this paper we study the energy savings and the delay tradeoffs involved in data aggregation and how they are affected by factors such as source-sink placements and the density of the network. We also investigate the computational complexity of optimal data aggregation in sensor networks and show that although it is generally NP-hard, there exist polynomial special cases.
