In addition to transmitting a string corresponding to the space, each beacon transmits a unique identi?er. The combination of the location string and identi?er is unique across the entire system. This allows the listener to correlate the RF and ultrasonic beacon signals correctly.
The raw line-of-sight range of our ultrasonic transmitter-receiver pair is around 50 feet, when both the transmitter and the receiver are facing each other. However, by mounting the ultrasonic transmitters carefully, as described in Section 3.3, we are able to reduce the effective range to around 30 feet in the absence of any obstacles. The line-of-sight range of the RF transmitter-receiver pair is about 80 feet, which drops to about 40 feet when there is an obstacle (e.g., a wall). Since RF can travel farther than an ultrasonic transmission and can also travel through certain obstacles, it is almost impossible for a listener to receive an ultrasonic signal without receiving the corresponding RF signal.
We discovered that one way to reduce the occurrence of false correlations is to use a relatively sluggish RF data transmission rate! Instead, if we used a high-bandwidth RF channel, the data identifying a space would reach a listener before the ultrasound pulse was detected. I.e., if S is the size in bits of the message sent over the RF channel with a transmission rate of b bits/s, and ris the maximum propagation time for an ultrasonic signal in air between a beacon and a listener, a value of b<S/rwould mean that the ultrasonic signal corresponding to a given RF message would arrive while the S message bits are still being received. Together with the fact that the range of our ultrasound is smaller than our RF, this establishes that any potentially correlated ultrasound pulse must arrive while an RF message is being received. In the absence of interfering beacon transmissions, this check suf?ces to do the correct correlation. The speci?c parameters used in our implementation are described in Section 3.
We now proceed to investigate the different interference scenarios that are possible.
