To improve the quality of aggregates, we propose a simple caching scheme: parents remember the partial state records their children reported for some number of rounds, and use those previous values when new values are unavailable due to lost child messages. As long as the duration of this memory is shorter than the interval at which children select new parents, this technique will increase the number of nodes included in the aggregate without over-counting any nodes. Of course, caching tends to temporally smear the aggregate values that are computed, reducing the temporal resolution of individual readings and possibly making caching undesirable for some workloads. Note that caching is a simple form of interpolation where the interpolated value is the same as the previousvalue. More sophisticatedinterpolationschemes, such as curve fitting or statistical observations based on past behavior, could be also be used.
We conducted some experiments to show the improvement caching offers over the basic approach; we allocate a fixed size buffer at each node and measure the average number of devices involved in the aggregation as in Section 7.3 above. The results are shown in the top three lines of Figure 7 – notice that even five epochs of cached state offer a signi?cant increase in the number of nodes counted in any aggregate, and that 15 rounds increases the number of nodes involved in the diameter 50 network to 70% (versus less than 10% without a cache). Aside from the temporal smearing described above, there are two additional drawbacks to caching; First, it uses memory that could be used for group storage. Second, it sets a minimum bound on the time that devices must wait before de
 termining their parent has gone of fiine; given the benefit it provides in terms of accuracy, however, we believe it to be useful despite these disadvantages. The substantial benefit of this technique suggests that allocating RAM to application level caching may be more beneficial than allocating it to lower-level schemes for reliable message delivery, as such schemes cannot take advantage of the semantics of the data being transmitted.
