In the second experiment, we examine the robustness of Cricket against interference amongst nearby beacons. It shows that it is indeed possible to achieve good system performance, despite the absence of any explicit coordination amongst the beacons. We also compare the performance of the three listener inference algorithms presented in Section 2.2.3.
Figure 8 shows the setup for this experiment. Beacons B1 and B2 provide location information within room X . Beacons B3 and B4
provide location information for rooms Y and Z . All these beacons are within the range of each others ultrasonic transmissions. To provide RF interference with no corresponding ultrasonic signals (since the range of RF exceeds that of ultrasound in Cricket), we use beacons I1 and I2 that have their ultrasonic transmitters disabled. All the beacons were attached to the ceiling with the ultrasonic transmitters facing their respective spaces as described in Section 2.3. We gathered distance samples at locations R1 and R2 for a static listener. Observe that R1 is closer to the interfering sources I1 and I2 than to the legitimate beacons for the room, corresponding to the presence of severe RF interference. In contrast, R2 is
only 1 foot away from the boundary separating the rooms X and Y , showing the performance close to a boundary.
First, we determined the degree of interference caused by I1 and I2 by collecting 1000 samples of distance estimates at R1 and R2 and counting the number of values corresponding to each RF source (beacon or interferer). When the listener was at R1 , somewhat farther from the interfering sources, there were no distance samples corresponding to the interfering RF sources. On the other hand, at R2 we received a total of only 7 samples corresponding to both
I1 and I2 , despite the fact that R2 is closer to I1 and I2relative to the
legitimate beacons. Table 1 summarizes these results.
The samples corresponding to I1 and I2 are due to the incorrect correlation of these RF signals with ultrasonic pulses from other beacons in the vicinity of the listener. However, the randomized transmission schedule together with proper system parameters reduces the occurrence of such interference to a very small fraction of the total. This validates our claims in Section 2.2 and our design.
We now investigate the performance of the three inference algorithms, Majority, MinMean, and MinMode, when the listener is at R1 and R2 . Here, we compute the error rate (in percent) in inferring the location by these three inference algorithms, varying the number of distance samples used for inference. The results, shown in Figure 9 (for position R1) and Figure 10 (for position R2), demonstrate that both MinMean and MinMode perform very well even when the sample size is small, even for the case when a listener (R1) is close to a boundary.