A sensor database involves stored data and sensor data. Stored data include the set of sensors that participate in the sensor database together with characteristics of the sensors (e.g., their location) or characteristics of the physical environment. These stored data are best represented as relations. The question is: how to represent sensor data? First, sensor data are generated by signal processing functions. Second, the representation we choose for sensor data should facilitate the formulation of sensor queries (data collection, correlation in time, and aggregates over time windows). Note that time plays a central role. Possibly, signal processing functions return output repeatedly over time, and each output has a time-stamp. In addition, monitoring queries introduce constraints on the sensor data time-stamps, e.g., Query 3 in Example 1 assumes that the abnormal temperatures are detected either simultaneously or within a certain time interval. Aggregates over time windows, such as Query 4 and 5, reference time explicitly. Given these constraints, we represent sensor data as time series. Our representation of sensor time series is based on the sequence model introduced by Seshadri et al. [19]. Informally, a sequence is defined as a 3-tuple containing a set of records R, a countable totally ordered domain O (called ordering domain – the elements of the ordering domain are referred to as positions) and an ordering of R by O. An ordering of a set of records R by an ordering domain O is defined as a relation between O and R, so that every record in R is associated with some position in O. Sequence operators are n-ary mappings on sequences; they operate on a given number of input sequences producing a unique output sequence. All sequence operators can be composed. Sequence operators include: select, project, compose (natural join on the position), and aggregates over a set of positions. Because of space limitation, we refer the reader to [4] for a formal definition of sensor time series We represent sensor data as a time series with the following properties: 1. The set of records corresponds to the outputs of a signal processing function over time.  2. The ordering domain is a discrete time scale, i.e. a set of time quantum; to each time quantum corresponds a position. In the rest of the paper, we use natural numbers as the time-series ordering domain. Each natural number represents the number of time units elapsed between a given origin and any (discrete) point in time. We assume that clocks are synchronized and thus all sensors share the same time scale. 3. All outputs of the signal processing function that are generated during a time quantum are associated to the same position p. Note that, in case a sensor does not generate events during the time quantum associated to a position, the Null record is associated to that position. 4. Whenever a signal processing function produces an output, the base sequence is updated at the position corresponding to the production time. Updates to sensor time series thus occur in increasing position order. 