As described in Section 2, ultrasonic interference at the receiver can lead to incorrect distance measurements. It is therefore important to reduce ultrasonic leakage to other locations while trying to provide full coverage to the location served by a Cricket beacon. We achieve this by proper alignment of the ultrasonic transmitters.
Figure 4 shows the radiation pattern of the ultrasonic transmitter used in the Cricket beacons. This is shown in (r, )polar coordinates, where r corresponds to the signal strength in dB and   corresponds to the offset in degrees from the front of the ultrasonic transmitter. From the radiation pattern, it can be seen that the direction in which the ultrasound transmitter faces (  0 ) has the maximum signal strength, while the signal strength drops to 1% (-20 dB) of themaximum value at +- 50 away from the 0 direction.
We align the ultrasonic transmitter such that the direction of its peak signal strength is at 4S to the horizontal. The beacon is mounted such that the ultrasonic transmitter faces the location intended to be covered by the beacon. This causes the amount of ultrasonic energy transmitted toward distant locations to be small compared to where it is intended. This alignment is easily accomplished by positioning the transmitter at an angle of  45  to the circuit board of the beacon and mounting the board ?at on the ceiling or wall of the room, as shown in Figure 5.
We use the velocity of sound in air to measure distances from beacons to receivers.The velocity of sound depends on environmental factors such as the ambient temperature and humidity. Within a building, these properties can exhibit both temporal and spatial variations. Temporal variations occur at different time-scales such as time of day and season of the year. We avoid errors due to such temporal variations using relative rather than absolute distances in determining location (i.e., the primary goal of the listener is to determine which the closest beacon among a set of choices is).
Spatial variations in temperature and humidity due to effects like direct sunlight falling in different sections of a room, the presence of heaters and air conditioners within a room, or the use of humidi?ers within a room can affect ultrasound-based distance measurements. We reduce the errors caused by such spatial variations by positioning the beacons and aiming for only relatively coarsegrained location information. For instance, supposing that beacons are always kept 2 feet away from a boundary, the distance recorded from a transmitter in an adjoining room has to decrease by ~4 feet for a receiver to mistakenly assume that the adjoining room is closer. This would require a large variation of temperature and humidity along the path, which is highly unlikely under normal circumstances (the temperature coef?cient of the velocity of sound in air is 2 ft/sec per degree-Celsius).
