In the BAT system, various objects within the system are tagged by attaching small wireless transmitters. The location of these transmitters are tracked by the system to build a location database of these objects [1, 12].
The system consists of a collection of mobile or ?xed wireless transmitters, a matrix of receiver elements, and a central RF base station. The wireless transmitter consists of an RF transceiver, several ultrasonic transmitters, an FPGA, and a microprocessor, and has a unique ID associated with it. The receiver elements consist of an RF receiver, and an interface for a serial data network. The receiver elements are placed on the ceiling of the building, and are connected together by a serial wire network to form a matrix. This network is also connected to a computer, which does all the data analysis for tracking the transmitters.
The RF base station orchestrates the activity of transmitters by periodically broadcasting messages addressed to each of them in turn. A transmitter, upon hearing a message addressed to it, sends out an ultrasound pulse. The receiver elements, which also receive the initial RF signal from the base station, determine the time interval between the receipt of the RF signal and the receipt of the corresponding ultrasonic signal, from which they estimate the distance to the transmitter. These distances are then sent to the computer which performs the data analysis. By collecting enough distance readings, it is possible to determine the location of the transmitter with an accuracy of a few centimeters, and these are keyed by transmitter address and stored in the location database.
Bat derives its accuracy from a tightly controlled and centralized architecture that tracks users and objects. In contrast, Cricket is highly decentralized and there is no central control of any aspect of the system, which preserves user privacy, is simpler, and reduces management cost. The differences in design goals between Bat and Cricket lead to radical differences in architecture, although the use of ultrasound and RF is common to both systems.
