We develop and compare three simple algorithms to determine which the closest beacon is, overcoming the interference problems of the previous section: Majority, MinMean, and MinMode. In our analysis of these algorithms, the distance estimate is rounded to the nearest ten inches and the data put into different bins according to how frequently they occur. This is done for each beacon separately. Furthermore, isolated stray samples are eliminated from the analysis; a small threshold number of consistent values (two, in our implementation) are needed before the corresponding sample is included for analysis.

Majority. This is the simplest algorithm, which pays no attention to the distance estimates and simply picks the beacon with the highest frequency of occurrence in the data set. This algorithm does not use ultrasonic signals for determining the closest beacon, but as we ?nd in our experiments, this does not perform well. We investigate this primarily for comparison with the other algorithms.

MinMean. Here, the listener calculates the mean distance from each unique beacon for the set of data points within the data set. Then, it selects the beacon with the minimum mean as the closest one. The advantage of this algorithm is that it can be computed with very little state, since a new sample updates the mean in a straightforward way. The problem with this algorithm is that it is not immune to multipath effects that
cause the distance estimates to display modal behavior; where computing a statistic like the mean (or median) is not re?ective of any actual beacon position.

MinMode. Since the distance estimates often show signi?cant modal behavior due to re?ections, our approach to obtaining a highest-likelihood estimate is to compute the per-beacon statistical modes over the past m samples (or time window). For each beacon, the listener then picks the distance corresponding to the mode of the distribution, and uses the beacon that has the minimum distance value from among all the modes. We ?nd that this is robust to stray signals and performs well in both static and mobile cases.
Section 4 discusses the results of our experiments. We note that these are by no means the only possible algorithms, but these are representative of the precision attainable with different degrees of processing at the listeners.
