The message size of a beacon RF transmission is 7 bytes long in our implementation, and the RF transmission rate of our radios is 1200 bits/s. It therefore takes about 47 ms for the message to completely reach a listener, during which time an ultrasonic pulse can travel at most about 47 feet. The typical range of our RF radios is about 30 feet in the building. No listener can therefore be farther away than this to detect which space it is in.
Cricket is implemented using inexpensive, off-the-shelf, simple hardware parts that cost less than U.S. $10 per beacon and listener. The beacon consists of a PIC micro-controller running at 10MHz, with 68 bytes of RAM and 1024 words of program memory. It uses a low-power SAW resonator-based RF transmitter and a single-chip RF receiver, both operating in the 418 MHz unlicensed band [10] with amplitude modulation. The ?nal component is an ultrasonic transmitter operating at 40kHz. All of these are assembled on a small board and mounted on a ceiling or high on a wall.
The listener is only slightly more complicated. It has an identical micro-controller, a single-chip RF receiver, and an ultrasonic receiver with a single-chip tone-detector circuit, instead of the corresponding transmitters. It also has a TTL to RS-232 signal converter by which it interfaces to the host device, e.g., a laptop, hand-held computer, or any other service like a printer, camera, television, etc. This interface uses the standard RS-232 protocol at 9600 bits/s.
We measured the power consumption of a beacon, since the periodic transmission of an RF signal and ultrasonic pulse will eventually run the battery down. Although we did not explicitly design the hardware for low power consumption, we ?nd that it is quite ef?cient, dissipating 15 mW of power during normal operation (when it sends an RF and US signal every 250 ms on average). Currently, each Cricket beacon uses a single 9 Volt re-chargeable battery. We
plan to use a solar cell with a backup re-chargeable battery in the future