We now present our simulation results showing the energy costs of AC and DC protocols for both the ER and RS source placement models. The experimental setup is as follows: n = 100 nodes are placed in a square area of unit size; for the ER model, the sensing range S is varied from 0.1 to 0.3, and for the RS model the number of sources k is varied from 1 to 15; in both cases the communication radius R is varied from 0.15 to 0.45. For each combination of S or k and R 100 simulations were run. Any runs resulting in unconnected graphs or no sources, which can happen occasionally when the values of S or R are low, were not taken into account. The error-bars shown in the plots represent the standard error in the mean. Figure 1 compares the transmission energy costs of the various protocols as the communication range is varied In this ?gure it can be seen that the GITDC seems to coincide with the lower bound (from relation (3)) throughout. This is because the necessary conditions for result 4 holds with high probability in this setting. Also, the performance of the CNSDC approaches the optimal as R increases, as per the corollary to result 4. In all cases there is a 50?80% savings compared to the AC protocol. One thing to note in ?gure 2 for the RS model is that the lower bound is no longer tight, since the the sources are unlikely to be within one hop of each other except when R is very high. Intuitively, CNSDC performs poorly in the RS model since the sources can be far apart and it is not always bene?cial to aggregate at the source nearest to the sink. Figures 3 and 4 both show that while the absolute transmission costs may increase, the relative gains due to a good data aggregation technique like GITDC can be very signi?cant when the number of sources is high. To summarize, our experiments show that the energy gains due to data aggregation can be quite signi?cant particularly when there are a lot of sources (large S or large k) that are many hops from the sink (small R).

