Typical communication distances for low power wireless radios such as those used in Mica motes and Bluetooth devices range from a few feet to around 100 feet, depending on transmission power and environmental conditions. Such short ranges mean that almost all real deployments must make use of multi-hop communication, where intermediate nodes relay information for their peers. On Mica motes, all communication is broadcast. The operating system provides a software ?lter so that messages can be addressed to a particular node, though if neighbors are awake, they can still snoop on such messages (at no additional energy cost since they’ve already transferred the decoded the message from the air.) Nodes receive per-message, link-level acknowledgments indicating whether a message was received by the intended neighbor node. No end-to-end acknowledgments are provided.
The requirement that sensor networks be low maintenance and easy to deploy means that communication topologies must be automatically discovered (i.e. ad-hoc) by the devices rather than ?xed at the time of network deployment. Typically, devices keep a short list of neighbors who they have heard transmit recently, as well as some routing information about the connectivity of those neighbors to the rest of the network. To assist in making intelligent routing decisions, nodes associate a link quality with each of their neighbors.
We describe the process of disseminating queries and collecting results in Section 5 below. As a basic primitive in these protocols, we use a routing tree that allows a basestation at the root of the network to disseminate a query and collect query results. This routing tree is formed by forwarding a routing request (a query in TinyDB) from every node in the network: the root sends a request, all child nodes that hear this request process it and forward it on to their children, and so on, until the entire network has heard the request. Each request contains a hop-count, or level indicating the distance from the broadcaster to the root. To determine their own level, nodes pick a parent node that is (by de?nition) one level closer to the root than they are. This parent will be responsible for forwarding the node’s (and its children’s) query results to the basestation. We note that it is possible to have several routing trees if nodes keep track of multiple parents. This can be used to support several simultaneous queries with different roots. This type of communication topology is common within the sensor network community [42].
