We believe that sensor database systems are a promising new field for database research. We described a data model and long-running query semantics for sensor database systems where stored data are represented as relations and sensor data are represented as sequences. The version of the Cornell COUGAR system that we presented is a first effort towards such a sensor database system. The second version of COUGAR [4] improves on the initial prototype in that sequences are explicitly represented. This allows for more expressive sensor queries. In particular, queries containing aggregates over time windows can be expressed.  This first generation of the Cornell COUGAR systems demonstrated that the application of database technology shows much promise for providing flexible and scalable access to large collections of sensors. It also helped us identify a set of challenging issues that we are addressing with our ongoing research: ‧ Due to the large scale of a sensor network, it is highly probable that some of the sensors and some of the communication links will fail at some point during the processing of a long-running query.  We are studying how sensor database systems can adjust to communication failures and return a more accurate answer at the cost of increased response time and resource usage.  ‧ Sensor Data are measurements not facts. Indeed, to each value produced by a sensor is associated a probability that this value is correct. Often, sensor values correspond to continuous distributions, e.g. a normally distributed probability with a given mean and standard deviation. We are defining a data model and analogs of the relational operators for representing and manipulating continuous distributions.  ‧ Because of the large scale and dynamic nature of a sensor network, we cannot assume that a centralized optimizer maintains global knowledge and thus precise meta-information about the whole network. We are studying how to maintain meta-data in a decentralized way and how to utilize this information to devise good query plans. 