Garlic’s cost-based [S

79] optimizer enumerates plans by
invoking the appropriate root STARs of Section 3.2. Plans
for select queries are enumerated bottom up in three phases.
In the first phase, the enumerator applies the AccessRoot
STAR to every collection used in the query. Since at this
time Garlic stores no data, AccessRoot basically serves
to call RepoAccess.
In the second phase, the enumerator applies the
JoinRoot STAR, which invokes the RepoJoin STAR
as well as various other join STARs, each of which represents
one Garlic join method. It applies the JoinRoot
STAR iteratively, passing it two plans and a join predicate
each time. Initially, each plan is one of those enumerated in
phase one for a single table access. When all possible twoway
join plans have been examined, the enumerator invokes
the JoinRoot STAR to combine single table access plans
with two-way join plans to create the three-way joins, and
so on, until plans which join all the collections of the query
have been created. The enumerator considers all bushy join
orders. Since Garlic is a distributed system, bushy plans are
particularly efficient in many situations.
Garlic’s optimizer employs dynamic programming in order
to find the best plan with reasonable effort [S

79]. In
every step of plan enumeration, Garlic’s optimizer applies
pruning; that is, the optimizer does not use plan A as a building
block for other, more complex plans if A has higher
cost than another plan and A’s properties are a subset of
that plan’s. Only plans whose properties are included in a
cheaper plan’s are pruned; for example, if Plan 1 has higher
cost than Plan 2, but the Source of Plan 1 is Garlic (i.e.,
Source property is “Garlic”) and the Source of Plan 2 is
some data source, then Plan 1 may not be pruned because it
might be a building block for a winning plan that executes
most operators of the query in Garlic’s query engine.
In the third phase, the enumerator applies Garlic’s
FinishRoot STAR to get a final query plan that includes
all projections, selections and orderings specified in the
query and not so far achieved. When this rule completes,
all remaining plans will have the same properties, and the
least cost plan is chosen for execution.