The root node is responsible for creating a schedule of time
slots. Each time slot is designated as a send or receive slot,
whether it is for upstream or downstream communication,
and by the event type which it should be used to propagate.
The root creates the schedule one iteration at a time and
passes it down through the dissemination tree inside a control
event. The schedule of slots between two consecutive
downstream control events is called a single iteration of the
schedule.
Figure 2 illustrates the basic idea of creating a schedule
and passing it down the network tree using a simple scenario
that involves downstream propagation of control and data
events. The control event is a special type of event which
is created by TD-DES and contains scheduling information.
The control event is received by the node at level X in the
first time slot. In the next time slot, this node transmits the
control event down to the next level, X+1. In the time slot
following this, the node at level X+1 passes the control event
down to level X+2, and so on and so forth. To summarize,
iterations are delimited by control events and can consist of
a different number of data events. The control event that
initiates an iteration specifies the schedule of events (which
events will be disseminated and when) within that iteration.
Note that the schedule is shifted one slot at each level.
The schedule consists of a sequence of atomic send and
receive time slots, each one for a specified event type. In
general, for a particular event in a schedule, at a given node,
time slots are allocated as a receive slot followed by an immediate
send slot most of the time. At a particular node,
if the schedule specifies a receive time slot for event e1, the
node, if it subscribes to e1, will listen to the RF medium in
Rx mode during this time slot to receive such an event. If
the schedule specifies a send time slot for e1, the node can
use this time slot to transmit an event of this type (should
it have one to send).
Furthermore, each slot is distinguished as either a downstream
slot (for parent-to-child communication away from
the root) or as an upstream slot (for child-to-parent communication
toward the root). For downstream communication,
send and receive slots are used. Upstream slots are not designated
for event types, as they are speculatively allocated
– any event which is generated should be able to make use
of the next upstream slot. In addition, nodes must always
listen to upstream receive slots, as all events must be passed
up to the root, regardless of event type. Therefore, distinguishing
upstream slots for particular event types would
serve no beneficial purpose.
The downstream control event also includes data used by
the tree construction protocol, such as the number of hops
to the root and the parent node’s network-unique identifier.
Notice that for each downstream send event, the simultaneous
time slot at the next level down is a receive time slot for
the same type of event. Similarly, for upstream send events,
the concurrent time slot at the next level up the tree is a
corresponding receive time slot for the same type of event.