The above three schemes maintain a 0% missing rate
at the cost of extensive energy consumption by keeping
MCU and the sensor components unnecessarily
active. While the SM and CM schemes improve the
naive scheme, they represent different philosophies to
achieve energy savings in OTSNs. We envisage that
there are other energy saving schemes that can take
strengths of both camps and perform better. Figure 1
shows a solution space of energy saving schemes for
OTSNs.
Figure 1: Solution Space of Energy Saving Schemes
for OTSNs
In the figure, the x-axis denotes the sampling frequency
for each sensor node and y-axis denotes the
number of sensor nodes who are activated for objects
tracking. All the possible energy saving schemes for
OTSNs are restricted within the rectangular area. As
illustrated, the naive scheme becomes the SM scheme
if we continue to reduce the sampling frequency until
it reaches the minimal requirement1. On the other
hand, the naive scheme becomes the CM scheme if we
reduce the number of sensor nodes involved in monitoring
to one. Thus, if we reduce both of the sampling
frequency and the number of activated nodes to their
minimal bounds, we may have an ideal scheme which
represents the optimal solution we can obtain in this
solution space2. There may be many other possible
energy saving schemes existing in this solution space
(denoted by stars). Now the question is whether there
exists such an optimal scheme and how to obtain it?
The ideal scheme shows that for each moving object,
only one sensor node needs to be waken to monitor.
However it requires that node to be activated at the
right time (when a sensing period starts) and at the
right place (where the moving object is located). This
can only be achieved when the sensor nodes (hence
the network) have the ability to predict every single
movement of the object. If this is not achievable, can
we obtain a near-optimal energy saving scheme based
on some accurate predictions? Thus, the problem we
have becomes whether we can obtain an energy saving
scheme by trading off missing rate (introduced by the
less perfect predictions). Based on this analysis, in
Section 4, we propose a prediction-based energy saving
scheme.