Prediction results about the movement and destination
of the moving objects directly affect the effectiveness
of choosing target nodes. If the prediction is
accurate, less target nodes need to be activated for
collaborative tracking and less overhead is incurred.
In this paper, we propose a simple prediction model
based on an observation that object movement will remain
constant for a ceratin period of time. With this
assumption, the current node will predict the movement
of the object in the following (T _ X) seconds
and the sensor node where the object eventually arrives
(called destination node), without considering
the variance of the speed and direction during this period
of time. Therefore the speed and direction used
for estimation makes difference for the prediction results.
In the following we described three heuristics
for selecting the speed and direction used by the prediction
models:
‧ Heuristics INSTANT. Based on this heuristic,
the current node assumes that moving objects will
stay in the current speed and direction for the
next (T _ X) seconds. It is a very simple and
energy efficient heuristic, since the current node
doesn’t need other objects movement history for
the predictions.
‧ Heuristics AVERAGE. By recording and passing
some moving history, the current node derives
the object’s speed and direction for the next
(T _X) from the average of the object movement
history. Thus, heuristics AVERAGE incurs some
communication overhead because of the movement
history passing among sensor nodes. And
the overhead is controlled by the size of the history
or the number of the past states recorded.
‧ Heuristics EXP AVG. Instead of simply averaging
the history, EXP AVG assigns different
weights to the different stages of history. Compared
to AVERAGE, EXP AVG is not only able
to control the weights to the history which may
reflect the objects’ future movement, but also
compress the history information into a value,
thus reducing the transmission overhead