Due to the SON generation process, each peer Pi belongs to a
set of SONs, that are sufficiently connected internally. However, in
order to support queries directed to other SONs, the resulting SONs
also need to be sufficiently interconnected. The top-level initiator
picks from the set of representative peers of each SON, one peer
that will act as super-peer for the specific SON. In practice more
than one super-peers are chosen for each SON, in order to support
load-balancing within each SON and ensure fault-tolerance. In addition,
the initiator urges super-peers of the global SONs to create
connections to other super-peers. These connections are used to
ensure communication among SONs, in order to make any SON
reachable from any other SON, and at the same time avoid its potential
isolation from the rest of the network. In this way, the toplevel
initiator can essentially define the topological parameters of
the super-peer network, such as number of super-peers per SON,
super-peer connectivity degree, etc. For instance, if the super-peer
topology is a hypercube [16], then each super-peer creates log2Nsp
links, where Nsp denotes the number of super-peers.
Then, each super-peer creates and maintains information about
its peers, in order to be able to determine which peers are relevant
to a query, without having to contact all peers. This is typically
an index of peers’ features. The final organization of the peers is
depicted in Figure 3.
Furthermore, as an extra, optional step to the SON generation
algorithm, we propose an adaptive strategy for document (and subsequently
peer) membership in a cluster (SON). After the global
SONs and their CDs have been determined, this information is
broadcast to all peers in an efficient way using the zone hierarchy.
Then each peer can recompute for each of its local documents,
the most similar CD, and thus: 1) make this document become
member of the associated cluster, and 2) the peer itself joins the
respective SON. Thus the final organization of documents to global
clusters (peers to SONs) is the result of this adaptive strategy, which
can also be considered as a feedback mechanism to clustering. In
the experimental part, we will show the advantages of the adaptive
strategy, in terms of increased clustering quality.
Summarizing, we emphasize the following features of SON creation:
1) the algorithm ensures that peers within a SON remain
well-connected and that sufficient connections exist among SONs,
2) peers having the roles of zone initiators are chosen at random and
perform their tasks completely independently of each other, 3) the
whole process is performed in a distributed and decentralized manner,
4) although SON creation resembles a hierarchical approach,
the hierarchy is actually made obsolete and is not used anymore
right after SON creation, avoiding excessive load on certain peers
or single points of failure, and 5) as a final result, the peers in the
initial unstructured P2P network have formed a super-peer network
in a self-organizing manner, with super-peers responsible for peers
with relevant content.