We described TD-DES, an integrated scheduling and data
dissemination model and protocol for multi-hop networks of
energy-constrained devices such as sensor networks. The
model is based on event-based communication, one that integrates
the division of the shared wireless medium access
based on network topology with the application specific semantics
of the data to be disseminated.
The network is arranged as an event dissemination tree,
with nodes subscribing to the event types they are interested
in. The event scheduler dynamically allocates and
multiplexes upstream and downstream time slots for each
event type. Power consumption among wireless nodes is reduced
by allowing each node to listen to the wireless channel
during the transmission times of data items which interest
them (or their topological dependents)– at other times, they
are allowed to save energy by powering down their radios.
We also presented preliminary performance results, based
on a detailed simulation model, that demonstrate significant
potential power savings of the proposed approach. We argue
that while TD-DES is efficient from a power consumption
perspective, it clearly suffers generally from worse multi-hop
dissemination latencies for generated events than does its
non-scheduled counterpart network (which provides optimal
latency at the expense of maximal power consumption).
In addition to conducting a more comprehensive quantitative
study of the proposed approaches, we plan to address
the following issues as part of our future work:
Implementation and Clock Synchronization. We
are currently implementing our protocols on top of Mica
sensors (a.k.a. motes) [1] running TinyOS [5]. A key implementation
issue that needs be addressed is clock synchronization.
TD-DES calls for each child to have its clock internally
synchronized with that of its parent for the protocols
to work correctly. The protocols require that the clock errors
are insignificant relative to the duration of individual
time slots. While traditional approaches designed for wired
networks (e.g., NTP [18]) may not provide sufficiently high
precision, recent proposals that were designed specifically
for wireless sensor networks [9, 8] lower the error rates down
to several microseconds. Such a precision is good enough for
our purposes, because we expect a typical slot duration to
be in the order of milliseconds.
Mobility and Reliability. In this initial study, we have
focused only on static topologies. The dissemination tree
construction protocol allows dynamic topology changes and
can therefore cope with node mobility. On the other hand,
situations may arise when packets may not arrive to their
destinations during node movements. Reliable delivery can
be ensured by using a straightforward ack-retransmit scheme
integrated with caching: if a node received an event with
a sequence number, but had not received the previous sequence
number, it might request its parent to resend the
event. The challenge here is to ensure reliability in such a
way that the power efficiency of the system is not compromised.
Another related reliability concern arises due to the use of
a tree-based dissemination topology. Even though the tree
structure is self organizing and can adapt quickly to node
failures and disconnections, mesh-based organizations [28]
are inherently more reliable as they provide multiple paths
between network nodes. Extending the protocols to mesh
topologies is an interesting research direction.
Caching and Aggregation. Recent work has focused
on upstream aggregation techniques [26, 18] to reduce the
volume of data transmission. TD-DES can support upstream
aggregation as well as much less studied downstream
aggregation where the key idea is to aggregate multiple events
of the same type at the root before propagating them downstream.