Efforts to decrease the power consumption of wireless devices
were made at all networking layers. At the physical
layer, efforts have included utilizing lower-power radio propagation
techniques, such as code division spread spectrum
(e.g., DSSS and FHSS [35]). At the datalink layer, medium
access control (MAC) protocols govern when and how the
nodes of the network coordinate to share a broadcast channel
effectively. CSMA MAC protocols [6, 24, 11] are generally
wasteful inasmuch as nodes must constantly monitor
the broadcast channel in Rx mode – an expensive radio
function. Other protocols, such as TDMA [20, 23], have
been designed to allow nodes to power down their antennas
during particular time-slots of a predetermined schedule.
However, these work do not consider network topology
and application-specific data interests.
Imielinski’s work [17], where a wireless server broadcasts
data items according to a temporal directory, also has the
goal of reducing power consumption. The directory tells
clients when to listen for particular data items. This is
analagous to the downstream control event in TD-DES. Another
related model is that of broadcast disks [7] proposed
for asymmetric systems in which a server broadcasts a rotating
schedule, or disk, of data downstream to clients. This
model was later extensively studied and extended for hierarchical
data dissemination (e.g., [15]). TD-DES borrows
from both models the basic notion of disseminating events
through a schedule. TD-DES also assumes a multi-hop network
environment where the topology of the network can
be arbitrary and needs to be taken into account, which significantly
complicates the problem. Furthermore, TD-DES
is designed for symmetric data flow, downstream as well as
upstream, whereas the other protocols address asymmetric,
downstream communication only.
Recent work on wireless publish/subscribe [16] also uses
soft-state trees for data dissemination. This work describes
several heuristics for dissemination tree construction but
does not address power-management through scheduled powerdown
periods.
Directed diffusion [19], TAG [26], and the COUGAR [37]
address data-centric extraction of information from wireless
sensor networks, commonly through intelligent in-network
data aggregation. Our approach can be regarded as a generalization
of TAG’s epoch-based aggregation approach. In
the TAG approach, aggregation takes place over time as
a sequence of epochs, each consisting of data propagation
from children to parent nodes and generic data aggregation
at the parents. The TAG approach is geared specifically
towards upstream aggregation, whereas our approach is a
step towards generic upstream and downstream event-based
data dissemination. Furthermore, the scheduling issues we
investigate have not been addressed by prior work.
Most relevant to our approach are topology management
schemes that address the issue of which nodes should turn
their radios off and when. S-MAC [38] allows nodes to go
to sleep periodically. Nodes go to sleep for some time, and
then wake up to listen to see if other nodes want to talk
to them. Sleep schedules can be adjusted on a per-node
basis. In STEM [34], nodes use two seperate radios, one
acting as a low-power paging channel and one as a data
transmission channel, to trade off power savings for path set
up latency. Nodes use the paging radio to detect tranmission
requests from their neighbors, and then wake up their
primary radio to pick up the actual data transmission. TDDES
shares similar goals with these topology management
schemes. Unlike these schemes, however, TD-DES also addresses
application semantics-based data dissemination and
scheduling.