Furthermore, merely as a showcase, we compare the achieved
recall values of our SON-based approach against the recall that
normalized flooding achieves, using the same number of contacted
peers, for Reuters/P1000. This is clearly not comparative to our
approach, however we include it to demonstrate the problems that
a naive search mechanism encounters. Normalized flooding [10]
is an improved variation of flooding, in which each peer forwards
a query to Nn neighbors, instead of all neighbors, where Nn is
usually the minimum connectivity degree of any peer in the network.
The results, shown in Figure 4(a), demonstrate that in this
experiment the SON-based approach improves the recall achieved
by the naive approach by (at least) a factor of 7. Notice that we
Figure 4: Comparison of SON-based recall with two baseline
approaches for Reuters/P1000: (a) vs. normalized flooding for
the same number of contacted peers, and (b) vs. super-peer for
a super-peer topology of 25 super-peers.
tried a similar experiment for GOV2/P1000, however the recall of
the flooding variant was practically zero, demonstrating the inapplicability
of flooding.
We use as a baseline, the recall that a super-peer network that is
not SON-based would achieve. Practically, assuming we have Np
peers uniformly assigned to Nsp super-peers, we use as baseline
the recall achieved by contacting the best N super-peers (and their
peers) for a given query. We compare this recall, with the recall that
the SON-based approach achieves by contacting the top-N SONs.
This comparison aims to illustrate the performance gains – in terms
of result quality – of our approach against a plain super-peer architecture.
In Figure 4(b), we compare the SON-based approach to a
super-peer topology of Nsp=25 super-peers (equal to the number of
SONs generated for the same document collection Reuters/P1000).
The results show that our approach significantly outperforms a similar
plain super-peer architecture by a factor of 1.5-3.5. Concluding
the achieved recall values demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.