This paper addresses the challenging problem of similarity search
over widely distributed ultra-high dimensional data. Such an application
is retrieval of the top-k most similar documents in a widely
distributed document collection. Themassive amounts of distributed
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
LSDS-IR’08, October 30, 2008, Napa Valley, California, USA
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-254-2/08/10 ...$5.00.
high-dimensional data, such as digital libraries and web accessible
text databases, motivate our work towards an infrastructure for efficient
similarity search in peer-to-peer (P2P) environments. The
overall goal is for a set of cooperative computers to support advanced
search mechanisms that go beyond exact matching and involve
ranking.
P2P systems emerge as a promising solution to delve with data
management in cases of high degree of distribution. Contrary to
centralized systems or traditional client-server architectures, nodes
participating in a large P2P network, store and share data in an autonomous
manner. Such nodes can be information providers, which
do not wish to expose their full data to a server or be part of a centralized
index. Therefore, a grand challenge is to provide efficient
and scalable searching, in a context of highly distributed content,
without necessarily moving the actual contents away from the information
providers. Then the problem of lack of global knowledge
– in the sense that each peer is aware of only a small portion of the
network topology and content – needs to be dealt with. The solutions
proposed in such an unstructured P2P environment usually
lead to approaches that incur high costs, and thus deter the design
of efficient searching over P2P content.
In this context, the first challenge is to organize content in an
unsupervised, decentralized and distributed way. Unstructured P2P
systems in their basic form suffer from high search costs in terms
of both consumed bandwidth and latency, so in order to be useful
for real applications, more sophisticated search mechanisms are required.
An approach that has been proposed recently is the use of
Semantic Overlay Networks (SONs) [3, 6], where peers containing
relevant information are grouped together in overlay networks.
Once SONs have been created, queries can be forwarded only to
the most similar SONs to the given query, thus reducing the query
cost and, at the same time, increasing the quality of results (mainly
in terms of precision). More advanced search mechanisms, that
go beyond exact matching, such as similarity search, can then be
deployed on top of the newly generated SONs.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for constructing SONs
in an unstructured P2P network, aiming to use SONs as the underlying
infrastructure for efficient similarity search. A main objective
of our work is the distributed and decentralized generation
of SONs. Peers with similar content eventually become part of a
logical cluster, resulting in a super-peer architecture, where each
super-peer becomes responsible for a thematically focused group
of peers, namely a SON. In this way, a similarity query can be
guided to the N most similar - to the query - overlays, thus achieving
quality of results comparable to centralized search and at the
same time avoiding the excessive cost of exhaustive search.
The main contribution of this work is a scalable approach for
distributed SON creation in unstructured P2P networks, and al-
gorithms for recursively merging clusters of peer data and creating
links between peer groups, in order to generate well-connected
SONs with similar content that span the entire P2P network. The
innovation of this paper relative to previous related work on organizing
content in large P2P networks and P2P similarity search
lies in: 1) our approach to P2P clustering is completely unsupervised
(we make no assumptions of common ontology or common
knowledge among peers) and contrary to other approaches, such as
gossiping [25], random meetings [2, 18], assumptions on peer contents’
probability distributions [11], it guarantees that the resulting
clusters span the entire network, and 2) while most P2P similarity
search approaches rely on moving content or detailed indexes to
remote peers usually employing a DHT infrastructure [17, 20], our
approach relies on an unstructured P2P network that evolves into
a super-peer architecture, hence the peer’s actual data do not need
to be stored at remote peers arbitrarily defined by a hash function.
The merits of our approach are evaluated on two large document
datasets (GOV2 and Reuters), thus proving the applicability of our
ideas and demonstrating both the result quality and the performance
gains experimentally. In particular, by contacting the best 3 superpeers
(SONs), we manage to achieve 85-96% of the recall1 that
would be achieved if all data were available in a central location.
The organization of the rest of this paper is as follows: In Section
2, we give an overview of related work. In Section 3, we describe
in detail the process of distributed semantic overlay network
generation and how the unstructured P2P network evolves into a
clustered super-peer network. Section 4 describes how similarity
search can be efficiently performed using the SONs. In Section 5,
we present experimental results, acquired through simulations. Finally,
in Section 6, we conclude the paper and outline future research
directions.