Figure 5(a) plots the energy consumption as the pause
time varies from 40 to 2000ms. The pause time in xaxis
is logarithmical scaled for clarity. As shown in
the figure, CM outperforms PES (with all combinations
of different heuristics) when the moving object
changes its speed and direction very frequently (e.g.,
when pause time is below 200ms). Also, as shown in
Figure 5(b), the corresponding missing rates of PES
are high. Thus, we can easily conclude that a moving
object should be continuously tracked using the CM
scheme when its moving behavior is highly dynamic
and unpredictable.
On the other hand, observed from the above two
figures, the energy consumptions and missing rates
of the PES scheme dramatically decrease (which can
be observed in regularly scaled figures) as the pause
time increases. When the pause time equals to 200ms
(which still represents a pretty dynamic moving behavior),
the PES scheme employing ALL NBR heuristic
in the wakeup mechanism outperforms the CM
scheme while maintaining a very low missing rate (below
2.5%). When the pause time further increases,
the PES scheme with heuristics DESTINATION and
ROUTE both lower their missing rates with even more
energy savings. When the pause time is 800ms, heuristic
ROUTE saves more than 60% energy over the CM
scheme with less than 5% of missing rate. Thus, we
can conclude that, a PES scheme (based on application
requirements) can be used to replace the CM
scheme to achieve a considerable energy saving when
the moving behavior of a tracked object is not drastically
dynamic.
Figure 5(a) and Figure 5(b) also compare the PES
schemes with both of INSTANT and EXP AVG prediction
heuristics. Basically, the different heuristics
for wakeup mechanism have a much higher impact on
performance than the heuristics for prediction since we
can see that the PES curves are paired based on the
wakeup heuristics. Even so, we can still observe that
the EXP AVG outperforms INSTANT. This is particularly
visible when the moving behavior of the object
is highly dynamic. However, the difference quickly disappears
when the pause time increases. Since the CM
is the scheme of choice for a highly dynamic moving
object and there is no noticeable performance difference
between EXP AVG and INSTANT, we will not
show performance result of the PES scheme corresponding
to EXP AVG model for the rest of experiments
(where the moving behavior of object is set to
be reasonably dynamic to explore the impacts of other
factors).