The goal of zone creation is to partition an unstructured P2P network
into smaller subgroups. These subgroups are called zones
and each zone is created by an initiator. Given a preferred zone
size SZ, initiator selection results in approximately one initiator –
also called zone initiators – in every SZ peers. During zone creation,
the task of each initiator is to create a zone of peers by means
of a local flooding-based algorithm. Using this algorithm, an initiator
first captures its neighboring peers, then their neighbors, and so
forth, as long as neighboring peers have not been captured by another
initiator. These captured peers constitute the initiator’s zone.
Thus an initiator’s zone is restricted by the boundaries of other initiators’
zones.
Moreover, the algorithm ensures that any connected peer in the
network finally belongs to some zone. We emphasize that a zone
is a plain topological (not semantic) grouping of peers that are
"around" a zone initiator, and obviously zones contain nonoverlapping
sets of peers. Both initiator selection and zone creation
are completely distributed and they are performed using the
algorithm presented in [6]. The basis of the zone creation algorithm
is a probe message sent from each initiator and flooded until it is
received by a node which is also initiator or has received a probe
message from another initiator. Since a certain amount of peers are
initiators and a zone will have limited size, the amount of messages
is not very high.
Zone creation is a necessary step, in order to put an upper bound
on the burden imposed on initiators. As will be shown next in detail,
initiators assemble cluster descriptions of peers in their zone,
and they perform clustering to create new clusters that span the
contents of the entire zone. Thus, SZ practically defines an upper
limit on the number of peers that can belong to a zone, as well as
the number of initiators. Hence, if peers in a network do not have
high processing capabilities, SZ can be set to a low value, in order
to avoid excessive load on some initiators. Notice that in the case
of a zone of excessive size, the initiator can decide to partition its
zone, by splitting it into two or more zones.