The confluence of ubiquitous RF-based wireless networking
[14, 4, 3] and recent advances in low-power analog and
digital electronics has led to the emergence of compact, inexpensive,
battery-operated sensor units equipped with computational
and wireless communication capabilities [22, 33].
Due to their increasingly favorable form and cost factors, it
is feasible to link together a large number of such sensors
in order to support fault-tolerant, fine-grained monitoring
and tracking applications [13, 32]. Cheap and ubiquitous
platforms of networked sensors will be the key to real-time
delivery of large volumes of useful information and will support
a variety of civil and military applications (such as traf-
* This work is partially supported by a gift from Microsoft Corporation.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee.
MobiDE’03, September 19, 2003, San Diego, California, USA.
Copyright 2003 ACM 1-58113-767-2/03/0009 ...$5.00.
fic monitoring, disaster recovery, industrial tracking, factory
instrumentation, inventory tracking, battlefield monitoring,
and intrusion detection).
Many current sensor networks consist of a relatively small
number of sensor units that are typically wired to a central
processing system. In constrast, in many emerging and
envisioned applications, sensor networks will be both distributed
and wireless (in terms of communication and power)
[10]. Distribution is necessary for improving sensing quality:
when the precise location of a signal is unknown, then
distributed sensors will allow sensing to take place closer to
the event of interest than what is possible by any single sensor.
Distribution also improves robustness to environmental
obstacles, which is especially crucial in situations where
sensing requires line-of-sight. Furtermore, the target environments
typically lack already existing communications or
energy infrastructures. The sensor units, thus, need to rely
on finite, local energy sources and wireless communications
channels. Finally, shorter-range communication is generally
much cheaper than longer-range communication because the
radio-signal power drops off with the fourth power of the distance
[13, 25]. As a result, it is much cheaper to transmit
information using multi-hopping among sensor units.
Consider the following application scenarios for distributed
wireless sensor networks. Habitat monitoring applications
involve data collection from and modeling of complex ecosystems
without disturbing the habitat and wildlife. Monitoring
facilities must be deployed in remote locations that do
not have pre-existing communication and energy resources.
As a case in point, researchers have recently deployed wireless
sensor networks on Great Duck Island, Maine, that monitor
the microclimates in and around nesting burrows used
by Leach’s Storm Petrel [2]. Secondly, consider an ad hoc
smart space where large numbers of disposable sensors that
are densely scattered into a building damaged by an earthquake
[12]. The sensors can establish an ad hoc communication
network and cooperate to divide the task of mapping
the structural damage in an efficient manner. Finally, tactical
operations taking place in unknown or hostile regions can
also benefit from ad hoc wireless sensor networks. Soldiers
can be equipped with battery-operated sensors that monitor
critical signs such as body temperature or heart rate.
In case of an emergency situation, the wireless network automatically
directs the nearest emergency response team to
wounded individuals [31].
In these and similar sensor network applications involving
battery-operated nodes, network longevity (i.e., total opera
tional lifetime) is a key consideration. In many cases, replacing
or recharging batteries may be impractical or uneconomical.
For instance, during a tactical mission, it is clearly not
desirable to have to be concerned about replacing batteries
(which requires human interference and attention). Another
example involves next-generation smart dust-style sensor
networks [22], which are composed of densely populated
units that are deeply embedded into the environment. The
smart dusts are expected to be so cheap that they will be
practically disposable: it will make more economical sense
to incrementally deploy new nodes rather than to replace
the batteries of the existing ones.
Designing energy-efficient systems is a research goal of
critical importance for a variety of networking domains, including
sensor networks and mobile ad hoc networks [36].
The primary consumer of energy in wireless networks is communication.
RF communications are very costly compared
to other electrical hardware functions including instruction
execution. Based on this observation, many researchers have
studied energy-minimization techniques that reduce communication
at the expense of extra computation. Most work
focused on developing approaches that reduce the volume
of data that need to be transmitted, typically through intelligent
data reduction and aggregation techniques (e.g.,
[18, 26, 27]). Less studied are techniques that enable nodes
to power down their antennas (i.e., go to sleep or standby
mode) during times of inactivity. This latter set of techniques
are particularly promising as the energy consumed by
short-range RF communications in transmission (Tx) and
listening (Rx) modes are quite similar for many existing
wireless hardware and protocols (including 802.11 [3] and
Bluetooth [14]). As a result, the only way to significantly
save energy is to completely turn the radio off [34, 38]. This
paper presents an integrated data scheduling and dissemination
protocol that leverages this key fact.
The proposed protocol, called Topology-Divided Dynamic
Event Scheduling (TD-DES), organizes the wireless network
into a multi-hop network tree. The root of the tree creates
a data dissemination schedule and propagates this schedule
throughout the tree, so that all nodes may adhere to it. The
schedule is divided into fixed-size time slots, each indicating
the type of data that are sent (or received), and whether
it is for downstream (i.e., away from the root) or upstream
(i.e., toward the root) communication. The schedule can
be periodic or refreshed in arbitrary intervals, depending on
the data traffic and applications. In either case, the central
idea is that nodes can save energy by powering down their
radios to standby mode when they have no data to send,
and when they (and their descendants) do not wish to receive
the data being transmitted. The system uses the publish/
subscribe model: each node has a specific subscription
profile that indicates which data types the node is interested
in receiving.
In a traditional wireless network, nodes must listen promiscuously
to the wireless channel for all data being transmitted,
lest they might miss something important. TD-DES
allows each node to selectively listen for data which interests
it, based on the its position in the network topology,
and save energy otherwise. Because data must be scheduled
before it is sent, the main tradeoff that we investigate is
increased power efficiency in exchange for sub-optimal message
dissemination latency.
Significant work has been done in the area of wireless
broadcast scheduling. Early work (e.g., [17, 7]) addressed
power consumption reduction in flat broadcast environments
and considered only asymmetric, downstream-only data dissemination.
More recent work [38, 34] attacked the same
problem in wireless, multi-hop network environments but
did not address application-specific scheduling and data dissemination
issues, which constitute the central theme of this
paper (see Section 5 for a detailed discussion of related prior
work).
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes
the basic sensor network model referenced throughout
the rest of the paper. Section 3 introduces and describes
in detail our integrated scheduling and data dissemination
protocols. Section 4 provides the results of a preliminary
characterization of the performance of our protocol. Section
5 describes related work, and Section 6 provides concluding
remarks and outlines directions for future research.