Content organization in P2P systems has attracted a lot of attention
recently. Semantic Overlay Networks (SONs) [3] have been
proposed as an approach for organizing peers in thematic groups,
so that queries can be forwarded to only those peers having content
within specific topics. A different notion of SONs related to
peers that are logically interconnected through schema mappings is
presented in [1].
Liu et al. [12] propose HSPIR, a hierarchical SON based on
CAN [19] and Range Addressable Network. Support for semantics
is achieved by using Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI). Tang et
al. [24] propose a system for SON creation on top of structured P2P
networks using LSI. Improvements to this approach are presented
in [12, 14]. However, some of the inherent problems of LSI, like
processing cost, choosing number of dimensions etc., make it difficult
to employ this technique in a large-scale dynamic document
repository. More importantly, both [12] and [24] assume a central
LSI computation, which presumes that all document representations
or a sample of reasonable size must be assembled at a central
location, which is not scalable for a large P2P system. In contrast to
these approaches, we do not presume a central point that collects all
documents, and we believe that a feasible P2P approach for search
using LSI should focus on distributed LSI computation. Hence, this
is a family of LSI-based approaches that cannot be compared to our
work directly.
Although several papers describe how to use SON-like structures,
little work exists on how to actually create SONs in an unsupervised,
decentralized and distributed way in unstructured P2P
1Recall is the fraction of the documents that are relevant to the
query that are successfully retrieved.
networks. Cholvi et al. [2] propose the use of acquaintances as an
extension to Gnutella-like networks to improve searching. Peers
with similar contents are linked together, so that searches for a particular
topic can be routed to more relevant peers in less time. A
similar approach has been described in [18]. Other relevant approaches
include gossiping algorithms [25], which have been proposed
as an alternative to flooding for routing queries in unstructured
P2P networks. A shortcoming of these approaches is that
they are restricted to networks of limited size, as they provide no
guarantees that remote peers will get acquainted in very large P2P
networks. Recently, a self-organizing super-peer network architecture
is presented, named SOSPNET [8], which deals with the issue
of how clients connect to a super-peer.
In previous work [6], we have proposed the DESENT protocol
for generating hierarchical semantic overlays. In this paper, we
present novel algorithms for SON merging that do not rely on a
fixed hierarchy, rather the focus is on building SONs that eventually
form a super-peer network, with a super-peer being responsible
for each SON. This results in a more robust and self-organizing architecture
that has a less hierarchical structure and is better in terms
of load-balancing and fault tolerance. Moreover we describe how
similarity search can be performed over the newly formed SONs
and perform a large-scale evaluation of the approach.
Content-based search in P2P networks [20] is usually related to
full-text search [13, 23, 26], with most approaches relying on the
use of structured P2P networks. Some research focuses on providing
P2P web search functionalities, like in [15], whereMINERVA∞
is presented, a P2P web search engine that aims at scalability and
efficiency. In MINERVA∞, each peer decides what fraction of the
Web it will crawl and subsequently index. Previous approaches regarding
P2P web search have focused on building global inverted
indices, as for example Odissea [22] and PlanetP [4]. A major
shortcoming of all these approaches is that their efficiency degrades
with increasing query length and thus they are inappropriate for
similarity search. Recently, approaches have been proposed that
reduce the global indexing load by indexing carefully selected term
combinations [21].
Recently, an approach for P2P similarity search in metric spaces,
called SIMPEER has been proposed [7]. Similarly to this work,
SIMPEER employs a super-peer architecture and it is applicable
for distributed document collections, since it is designed for metric
spaces. However, SIMPEER focuses more on the performance of
query processing for an existing super-peer network. Recently a
number of papers on P2P similarity search has appeared, e.g., [9].
However, these approaches are not suitable for similarity search
in document collections because of the very high dimensionality
(which is equal to the vocabulary cardinality).