In this section, we establish conditions under which a scheme
generating motion-prediction and constant-value prediction
(case#3) will perform better than the one generating only
constant-value prediction (case#2).
Let us assume that the average success rate for movement
predictions is s (expressed as percent of the total number
of movement predictions), and let the cost of computing a
movement prediction be Cm.
Assume that a motion-sensor is in steady state (i.e., the
light sensor reading is constant over time). When an object
passes by, the motion-sensor will see a pattern and report
this to the base-station. Assuming that the object took less
than one second to pass by, the reading of this motion-sensor
in the next frame would be its constant stable value. It will
report this constant value for two consecutive frames be-
fore the base station generates a constant-value prediction.
Thus, whenever an object passes by a motion-sensor, it re-
sults in three updates being sent to the base station. If the
base-station is able to correctly predict the movement of an
object, it can save these three transmissions. But in order
to predict correctly, it needs to process the readings of two
motion-sensors that this object triggered before passing the
current motion-sensor. Thus, the total energy consumed in
this case is given by:

TE3 = s x energy consumed when the prediction succeeds
+ (1-s) x energy consumed when the prediction fails
= s x (energy consumed in sending, receiving, and
processing updates sent by the two motion
sensors
+ energy consumed in sending constant value
predictions to the two sensors
+ energy consumed sending and receiving a
movement prediction)
+ (1-s) x (energy consumed in sending, receiving,
and processing updates sent by the two
motion sensors
+ energy consumed in sending constant value
predictions to the two sensors
+ energy consumed in sending and receiving a
movement prediction
+ energy consumed in sending and receiving
update due to failed prediction
+ energy consumed in sending constant value
predictions to the sensor)

In case#2, the total energy consumed would be:
TE2 = energy consumed in sending and receiving updates
from the three motion-sensors
+ energy consumed in sending constant value
predictions to the three sensors
= 3  (132  3 + (40+20))

In order for case#3 to perform better than case#2, the fol-
lowing condition must be satised:

From equations 2 and 3, we get,

Simplifying, we get,

Thus, even if the base station predicts successfully 30% of
the time, the scheme with movement prediction (case#3)
will perform better than the scheme with just constant-value
prediction (case#2).
Solving equation 4 for Cm, we get,

Thus, as long as we consume less than 123 J of energy
in processing an update, the scheme with movement pre-
diction (case#3) will perform better than the scheme with
just constant-value prediction (case#2). Given that 100 in-
structions consume 0.8 J of energy in the Mote, 94.5 J
is enough to perform 15,375 instructions. This, we believe,

is more than enough to generate movement predictions to a
good accuracy.