Like other sensor network applications, OTSN has
unattended nodes, dynamic topology, wireless transmissions
and distributed system architecture. In addition,
there are a lot of unique factors to be considered
when implementing OTSNs. In this section, we examine
those factors that impact the energy consumptions
of the OTSNs.
‧ Number of moving objects represents the
workload of the networks, which directly affects
the energy consumption of the entire network.
The more moving objects are inside the monitored
region, the more samplings and reporting
are needed.
‧ Reporting frequency is decided based on the
application requirements. A higher reporting frequency
is set when an application needs timely
updates about the moving objects. Otherwise,
keeping the reporting frequency low can reduce
the number of transmissions, and thus increases
the lifetime of the OTSN.
‧ Data precision is closely related with the sampling
frequency, the sampling duration and the
location models (see below). Therefore, a higher
data precision requires more data collection, more
intricate computation and larger update packets,
which result in more energy consumption on sensing,
computing and communication.
‧ Sensor sampling frequency is an important
factor for object tracking. A OTSN with low sampling
frequency may lose track of objects, but the
one with high sampling frequency incurs more energy
consumptions.
‧ Object moving speed is relevant to the sensor
sampling frequency. To keep track of the object,
the OTSN needs to sample more frequently on an
object which moves in high speed.
‧ Location models are used to represent the location
information, which is one of the most important
information to be obtained at sensor nodes.
Other movement information, such as speed and
directions, can be derived from the changes of locations
and elapsing time. Based on the location
identification techniques employed in the system,
location model can be categorized as geometric
model and symbolic model [8]. The appropriate
location models to be adopted depends on the application
requirements.