The emerging technologies in low-power microsensors,
actuators, embedded processors, and RF radios
have facilitated the deployment of large scale sensor
networks. Due to their low cost and capabilities
for pervasive surveillance, sensor networks and their
applications have tremendous potential in both commercial
and military environments. However, in addition
to the inherited limitations of the sensor nodes
such as scarce power resources, highly distributed cooperations
and unstable wireless communication, the
specific requirements of applications may bring additional
research challenges and issues to the design of
sensor networks. In this paper, we consider one of the
sensor network killer applications - object tracking.
Among the technical issues to be addressed in developing
sensor networks for object tracking, energy conservation
is probably the most critical one since the
sensor nodes are often supported by batteries which
could be difficult to replace. A lot of existing researches
are focussed on optimizing the communication
cost by inactivating radios as much as possible or
by trading off computation for communication [3, 4, 5].
However, these studies neglected a fact that, while
sensing and the computing components consume less
power than the communication components, they are
still important sources of energy dissipation in sensor
nodes, especially after the communication cost being
optimized. Thus, in this paper, we study the problem
of how to reduce the energy consumption in the
sensing and computing components of sensor nodes.
We define the problem and the requirements of
object tracking applications and develop some basic
energy-saving solutions which reduce the number of
sensor nodes needed for monitoring the moving objects
or decrease the frequency of sampling the environment,
respectively. Moreover, we discuss other
possible solutions by illustrating a solution space.
Based on our analysis and observations, we propose
a Prediction-based Energy Saving scheme, called PES,
that minimizes the number of nodes participating in
the tracking activities, while inactivates other nodes
into sleeping mode. Simulation based performance
evaluation, in terms of total energy consumption and
missing rate, has been conducted. The simulation result
shows that the PES can effectively reduce the
energy consumption on MCU and sensor components.
Moreover, the different heuristics discussed in this paper
can be used to balance the energy savings and
application requirements.
This paper makes three significant contributions.
Firstly, we present and compare several basic energy
saving schemes for object tracking sensor networks,
and point out the direction for designing an
energy-aware OTSN. Secondly, we propose and architect
a prediction-based energy saving scheme (i.e.,
PES) which consists of prediction models, wake up
mechanisms and recovery mechanisms. PES activates
only the essential sensor nodes needed to track the
moving objects, but hibernates other nodes into lowpower
mode. Lastly, we conducted an extensive performance
evaluation by simulating the OTSN and various
energy saving schemes we proposed. The study
provides profound insights for designing an energyaware
OTSN.
There are many related works that address energy
efficiency in sensor networks from various angles. In
[6, 13, 18], the analysis of power consumption on sensor
nodes provides an important heuristic for power
optimization in various areas of the sensor network design.
Energy awareness is also studied in the MAC layers,
such as TDMA and CDMA protocols [2, 11, 17].
Low-power paging channel, employed in this paper as
part of the OTSN communication protocols, is widely
discussed in [12, 13, 21]. In the network architecture
level, the clustering based approach and localized algorithm
have been proposed to dynamically cluster the
sensor nodes based on their remaining battery level
and density of the region [3, 5].
The ideas of utilizing predictions to reduce overheads
in mobile computing systems have appeared in
the literature. Prediction based techniques in cellular
network reduce the paging overhead by limiting search
space to a set of cells that mobile users may enter
[1, 19]. In wireless data broadcast protocol, mobile
computers turn on the radio only during the arrival
time of the requested data frames, which is predicted
based on the indexing information in the broadcast
channel [7, 9, 16]. Similarly in sensor networks, the
future reading at a sensor is predicted, given the past
reading history and the spatial and temporal knowledge
of readings from surrounding sensors [4]. In our
previous work[20], we also studied a localized network
architecture and a dual prediction mechanism, which
achieve power savings by allowing most of the sensor
nodes stay in sleep mode and by reducing the amount
of long-range transmissions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section
2 provides a background and the assumptions for
this paper, and also discusses the system factors that
are contribute to the network designs. In Section 3, we
clearly define the requirements of OTSN applications
and explore some basic schemes which represent the
different philosophies for optimizing energy usage in
OTSNs. Our prediction-based energy saving schemes
is presented in Section 4. Section 5 provides the simulation
results; and finally, Section 6 gives the concluding
remarks and points out the future work.