Predefined event types are defined by the overlaying applications
and are maintained in a global event schema. In
particular, a network with n different event types may publish
event types e1, e2, ..., en. Each node maintains its own
event subscription, which is the set of event types that a
node is interested in receiving. In addition, each node maintains
its own effective subscription, which is the union of its
own subscription and the subscriptions of all of its descendents
[16]. Each node must effectively subscribe to any event
type that it itself is interested in as well as any event type
that a descendent node is interested in. This is because each
node is responsible for forwarding all relevant events to its
descendants in the tree topology.
Figure 1 illustrates a dissemination tree of eight nodes and
three event types e1, e2, and e3. N1 is the root node of the
tree. The subscription of each node is given in parentheses
at the upper left of the node. The effective subscription of
each node is given at the upper right of each node in square
brackets. The figure also shows an event of type e2 generated
at node N5. The arrows indicate the links across which the
event is broadcast in order to disseminate the event to all
subscribing nodes. Note that the event is propagated both
upstream (to the root and then downstream to the interested
parties in the other subtree) and downstream. As a result,
events do not necessarily always go through the root node.
In general, an event is a particular message type with
its own distinguishing, application-specific semantics. Consider
a scenario where a sensor network whose purpose is
to detect fires is deployed over a forested region. A sensor
node might issue a fire detected event to the network if its
thermal sensor registered a very high temperature reading.
The event would be disseminated through the network to
all those nodes subscribing to fire detected events. These
could include nearby forest ranger stations, a centralized
forest fire monitoring station, or a sink node which could
notify the police, local fire-fighting units, and public news
services. These would also include any intermediate nodes
which had to forward such events to interested nodes, even if
they themselves were not interested per se. A different type
of event could be a low battery event, which would only
be disseminated to a network maintenance facility, alerting
personnel that a particular sensor node would soon fail if
its battery was not quickly replaced. Another type of event
could alert the same facility that the sensor equipment on a
node was not functioning properly.