In addition to making optimization simple for Garlic, the
STAR framework makes it easy to describe wrapper query
capabilities, and allows wrappers to start simply, and evolve
over time. While Garlic STARs may be complicated, due in
part to their use of other STARs to enforce needed properties,
wrapper STARs tend to be simple. Indeed, we have
found no need for wrapper STARs to invoke other STARs,
or even to build multiple wrapper POPs. In this section, we
demonstrate the power and simplicity of the STAR framework
for heterogeneous systems, by means of an example
involving three very different data sources. In the next section,
we extend our example to show how the Garlic optimizer
would optimize a query involving these three sources.
Consider a university with a relational database storing
basic information on each course offered, course descriptions
in a special text store, and an on-line complaint
mechanism that sends mail to an ombudsman. These three
sources (relational, text, and mail) are integrated using Garlic.
In the following, we provide relevant details of these
wrappers and define STARs for them.
The mail wrapper exports a Complaints collection of objects
of type Message. Messages each have Sender, Date,
Body and Subject attributes. The wrapper provides only the
ability to iterate through a collection, retrieving the OIDs.
To model this ability, it defines the simple plan access
STAR shown in Figure 9. Like every plan access
STAR, this STAR takes as parameters the identifier of a
collection (

), a set of attributes ( ), and a set of predicates
(

) that are used in the query. Regardless of  and

, this STAR always returns one plan consisting of a single
Quantifier POP. The Quantifier POP models the execution
of the query “select OID from T” in the data source
that stores

. The values of the properties (except cost and
cardinality) of the Quantifier POP are defined in Table 1;
the RepoAccess STAR would get these values from the
wrapper plan to create its PushDown POP. Query plans
generated using this STAR are executed as follows: the
OIDs of all messages of a collection are passed from the
wrapper to Garlic’s execution engine, which uses method
calls to the wrapper to get the attributes of the messages.
The simple STAR of Figure 9 could be used as a starting
point for wrappers of many different sources. (There
is nothing Mail-specific about it.) This STAR guarantees
that any query that accesses data from one of a wrapper’s
sources can be processed, but it does not model a wrapper’s
query processing capability, and therefore, plans generated
by this STAR often show poor performance. Initially
a wrapper writer might define only this STAR to integrate a
source quickly; later (s)he could add more powerful STARs
to improve performance. For example, we could initially
use this STAR to integrate the relational database, and then,
once we had made the relational data accessible, replace it
with the STARs of Figure 10 to exploit the relational engine’s
query processing power, improving performance.
The relational wrapper exports a Classes collection.
Class objects have attributes Course, Professor, etc. The
relational data source supports the usual relational operations,
and the wrapper provides STARs for access, bind and
join. These STARs are shown in Figure 10. They construct
a set of POPs which model the relational source’s operations.
Their properties are given in Table 1. plan access
generates an R Scan POP which models the execution of a
single-table query, aggressively applying all predicates and
retrieving all necessary columns. plan bind also builds
an R Scan POP, adding the binding predicates to the set. Finally,
plan join constructs an R Join POP, which models
the relational source’s ability to join two tables, again
applying all predicates and fetching all columns.
The text wrapper exports a single collection, Descrs,
which contains objects of type Blurb, with attributes
Name and Description. The text data source supports
single-collection queries with methods of the form contains(
string) or is about(string) modeling its search capabilities.
contains returns a boolean value, depending on
whether the document it is applied to contains the words
in the string. is about(string) returns a rank between 0 and
1 indicating how closely the document matches the terms in
the argument string. STARs defining this wrapper’s plans
are found in Figure 11. The POPs for these STARs are also
described in Table 1. Note that this wrapper provides two
plan access rules: one, which produces a T Scan POP,
simply scans the documents, returning whatever attributes
are asked for, and applying any “contains” or other String
predicates, and the other, which produces the T Rank POP,
returns the results in order of rank computed as a result of
an is about method in the order by clause.
From these three examples, we can see that the basic
query power of wrappers and data sources with vastly
different querying abilities can be modeled easily with a
handful of simple, single-POP STARs. There are two reasons
why wrapper STARs can be so simple. First, Garlic
provides a powerful query engine which can make up for
missing query function in the wrappers. Second, wrapper
STARs model “what” can be executed by a wrapper, not
“how”. For example, the relational wrapper exported a simple
plan join STAR to model that joins can be executed
by its data sources; it did not need to enumerate alternative
plans with different join methods because plans with
an R Join POP are translated into a multi-table (SQL) query,
and the optimizer of the relational data source automatically
determines the most efficient join methods. Precise modeling
of join methods may be required in the wrapper’s cost
model in order to estimate the cost of join processing in the
data source, but it is not required in the wrapper’s STARs.
These examples also demonstrate three further advantages
of our approach. First, we defined a simple minimal
STAR that might be the first STAR a wrapper would export.
This makes it easy to get a wrapper up and running. Second,
wrapper writers can add STARs or alternatives for an
existing STAR at any time, to expose more wrapper query
functionality to Garlic. This makes it easy to modify and
evolve wrappers. Third, each wrapper’s STARs were defined
independently of the others’, and without affecting
Garlic STARs or Garlic’s query services, making it easy
to add new wrappers to the system. Modeling power, low
“entry-cost” for writing wrappers, evolvability, and extensibility
are key advantages of our approach.