Based on application requirements, we first introduce
some basic energy saving schemes for OTSNs.
Naive: In this scheme, all the sensor nodes stays in
active mode to monitor their detection areas all the
time. As such, the objects in the network are always
tracked and their locations are reported to the base
station (every T seconds) by the nodes who have the
objects in their detection areas. This scheme, as its
name suggested, is not tunable to the application requirements
for energy saving. We introduce it here
to illustrate the principles used in other energy saving
schemes and later use it as a baseline for comparisons
with other schemes.
Scheduled Monitoring (SM): This scheme addresses
the fact that the application does not request
the network to report the sensed data all the time.
Assuming that all the sensor nodes and base station
are well synchronized, all the sensor nodes can turn
to sleep and only wake up when it’s time to monitor
their detection areas and report sensed results. Thus,
in this scheme, all the S nodes will be activated for
X second then go to sleep for (T ? X) seconds. This
scheduled monitoring process will be continued for the
entire network operation period. The advantage of
this scheme is that the sensor nodes spend minimal
time in active mode and stay in sleep mode as long
as they can. Hence, a significant amount of energy is
saved if the applications do not need frequent reports
from the network. However, in order to capture the
moving objects (i.e., to ensure no missing report), the
number of sensor nodes involved in object tracking is
more than needed.
Continuous Monitoring (CM): This scheme exploits
another aspect of energy saving in OTSNs. Instead
of having all the sensor nodes in the field wake
up periodically to sense the whole area, only the sensor
node who has the object in its detection area will
be activated. An awake node actively monitors the object
until the object enters a neighboring cell. It may
wake up the destination node (handoff) W seconds before
object enters. W, depending on the transmission
rate and object moving speed, is typically very small.
Thus, the handoff logically happens when an object
reaches the detection area boundary. In this way, the
sensor nodes trespassed by moving objects collaboratively
monitor the objects, and report the location of
the moving objects to the base station at the scheduled
reporting time. The advantage of this scheme is
that it involves only one sensor node to monitor each
moving object while other sensor nodes can turn to
sleep and save energy. However, to ensure no missing
report, the active sensor has to stay awake while there
exists an object in its detection area.