In the Carma algorithm [9], the maximum possible count of an
itemset is estimated by the minimum value among the maximum
possible counts of all of its subsets. A new itemset is inserted to a
lattice of itemsets if it is potentially frequent and all of its subsets
are maintained in the lattice. Similarly, the count of an itemset
that are not maintained can be estimated by its subsets that are
maintained in a monitoring lattice. For this purpose, the terms
defined in Definition 1 and Definition 2 are used.
Definition 1. For an n-itemset e (n 2), a set of its subsets P(e), a
set of its m-subsets Pm(e) and a set of counts for its m-subsets
PC
m(e) are formally defined as follows.
) A set of its subsets P(e) is composed of all possible
itemsets that can be generated by one or more items of the
itemset e i.e., P(e)={α|α s.t. α2e-{e} and α≠ }.
) A set of its m-subsets Pm(e) is composed of those itemsets
in P(e) that have m items (m<n) i.e., Pm(e)={α|α s.t.
αP(e) and |α|=m }.
) A set of counts for its m-subsets PC
m(e) is composed of the
distinct counts of all itemsets in Pm(e) i.e., PC
m(e)={C(α)|
α s.t. αPm(e) }, where C(e) denotes the count of an
itemset e over a data stream. 
Definition 2. For two itemsets e1 and e2, a union-itemset e1∪e2
and an intersection-itemset e1∩e2 are defined as follows.
) A union-itemset e1∪e2 is composed of all items that are
members of either e1 or e2.
) An intersection-itemset e1∩e2 is composed of all items that
are members of both e1 and e2. 
For an itemset, each of its subsets appears in at least as many
transactions as the itemset appears in. Furthermore, when all items
of an itemset always appear together in each transaction, the count
of the itemset should be identical to those of its subsets. Therefore,
the count of an itemset depends on how often its items appear
together in each transaction. Based on this observation, the
possible range of the count of an itemset can be identified by two
extreme distributions: least exclusively distributed (LED) and
most exclusively distributed (MED). When the items of an
itemset are LED, they appear together in as many transactions as
possible. On the other hand, the items of an itemset appear
exclusively as many transactions as possible when they are MED.
In a data set D, the count of an n-itemset e can be estimated by the
individual counts of its subsets. Its maximum count Cmax(e) is
found when all of its subsets are LED. It is the smallest value
among the counts of all the subsets. However, since the set of its
(n-1)-subsets can provide the most accurate information about the
count of the n-itemset, Cmax(e) can be estimated by only its (n-1)-
subsets. Therefore, when min(V) denotes the smallest value in a
set of values V, the maximum count Cmax(e) of an itemset e is
found as follows:
Cmax(e) = min(PC
n-1(e)) (2)
For two itemsets e1 and e2, the minimum count Cmin(e1∪e2) of
their union-itemset e1∪e2 can be estimated as follows.
where |D| denotes the total number of transactions in D and
max(V) denotes the largest value in a set of values V. Based on
Equation (3), the minimum count Cmin(e) of an itemset e can also
be estimated by the counts of its (n-1)-subsets. In other words, for
each distinct pair ( α
i, α
j) of its (n-1)-subsets i.e., α
i and α
j?Pn-1(e),
the count of their union-itemset α
i∪ α
j can be estimated. Among
the estimated counts for the itemset e, the largest count is the
guaranteed appearance count i.e., the minimum count Cmin(e) of
the itemset e as follows:
Cmin(e) = max({Cmin( α
i∪ α
j) | ?αi, α
j ? Pn-1(e) and i≠j})
The maximum count Cmax(e) of an itemset e is used as the
estimated count of the itemset. Consequently, there may exist an
estimation error count since Cmax(e) is the largest possible count
that the itemset can appear in the transactions of a data set. Let the
difference between Cmax(e) and Cmin(e) be the estimation error
E(e) of the itemset.