There are many classes of sensor networks [18], each with its
own characteristics. Mechanisms meant for one class may
not be appropriate for other classes. Before we discuss the
problem of optimizing these mechanisms, it is therefore im-
portant that we dene the class of sensor networks under
consideration in this paper.

In this paper, we adopt as a model one of the class of sensor
networks described in [18] that is large (in terms of number
of sensors), and has a non-deterministic1 topology. Also,
the sensors in this network may be multiple hops away from
the nearest wired node. This, according to [18], is the most
challenging class of sensor networks.

We assume that the sensors organize themselves in clusters,
1sensors are thrown randomly in the target eld

and that every cluster has a cluster-head2. The specific
mechanism for achieving this is orthogonal to our focus of
supporting energy-effcient monitoring. A possible mecha-
nism that may be used for this purpose has been proposed
in [8]. We assume the existence of some such mechanism.

As is typically the case in these networks, we assume that
sensors and base stations have limited energy and commu-
nicate sensed data over wireless link. Also, we assume that
within a cluster, the base station and the sensors use TDMA
at the link layer to communicate [8]. The TDMA schedule
is decided by the base station, which gets the rst slot in the
schedule. At the time the cluster is formed, the base station
publishes the schedule, thereby communicating it to all the
sensors in the cluster. They use it to appropriately switch
between active and sleep mode.

We assume that the base stations in the sensor network com-
municate with the outside world via a few nodes on the wired
network. We call these nodes the access points (wired base
station in the gure) (g. 3). We assume that every base
station is statically pre-congured to communicate via one
access point.

We assume that the sensors in a cluster know their location
relative to one another. Determining the location of a sensor
dynamically in a sensor network is a research area in its own
right, and orthogonal to the problem being addressed in this
paper. Several promising approaches ([13, 16, 4]) have been
proposed to solve this problem. We assume the existence of
some such mechanism.