For the base-station mote, all four sensors reside in the same
cluster. It divides the cluster into four macro-blocks such
that there is one sensor per macro-block. It makes predic-
tions based on the last two frames received.
The base station generates two types of predictions: con-
stant value prediction and movement prediction. We briey
describe each type of prediction and the specic technique
used to compute them.
6in our case we had placed them on the third oor of our
department's building

Figure 8: Typical variation in readings of a light

sensor when an object passes by
Constant value predictions
These predict that the reading of a sensor-mote is not going
to change over time. The base-station mote generates this
type of prediction when the readings in a macro-block do
not change for two consecutive frames. It always associates a
TTL of innity with this type of prediction. A sensor-mote's
reading changes only when an object blocks the light path
as it passes by. In our experiments, the periods of activity
(from the perspective of a sensor-mote) were very short (a
person passing by) compared to the periods of inactivity.
This prediction prevents the sensor from transmitting during
periods of inactivity.

The packet carrying constant prediction carries two elds:
type of prediction and the stable value of the sensor. It is 5
bytes in length (including 3 bytes of header).

Movement prediction
These predict that a sensor is about to see a pattern in
its reading. It is computed as follows: The block-matching
algorithm used by the base-station considers two motion-
vectors <dx=1, dy=0> and <dx=-1, dy=0> corresponding
to two possibilities: motion from left-to-right and motion
from right-to-left, respectively. For each macro-block in a
frame, it looks for a match in the next consecutive frame
by applying these motion-vectors. As soon as a match is
found, a movement prediction is generated and sent to the
next sensor along the direction of motion.

Note that sensor-motes transmit their readings to the base
station at a maximum rate of once per second resulting in
a frame rate of 1 frame/sec. However, it is possible that
an object takes more than one second to cover the distance
between two consecutive sensors. As a result, the base sta-
tion will see a sequence of zero or more frames reporting
no activity (no-activiy frame) in between two frames with
a macro-block reporting (activiy frame). In order to han-
dle this, the block-matching algorithm considers only the
most recently received activity frames, discarding any in-
tervening no-activity frames. However, the time dierence
between two consecutive activity frames used for generating
a movement prediction is not allowed to exceed a pre-dened
constant value.

Determining the degree of match
In order to determine if two macro-blocks match (appendix
A.2), it is important to specify the method for determining
the degree of match between readings of two sensor-motes.
Since each transmission of sensor-mote consists of 8 read-
ings, the naive approach of subtracting the two readings
cannot be applied here. We observe that as a person crosses
the light path, the readings of the light sensor are going to
drop from its stable value, stay at a lower value, and nally,
return back to the original stable value (see g 8). We refer
to the string of values between the two stable readings as
pattern-string (for example, the readings shown in g 8 con-
tains the pattern string: 3,0,0,0,3). We compute the degree
of match between readings of two sensor-mote by computing
the dierence in the lengths of their pattern-string.

Movement prediction packet
In the movement prediction packet, the base-station mote
species the interval in which the next sensor (along the
direction of motion) is most likely to see the pattern, and the
expected length of the pattern-string. The time interval is
determined based on the assumption that the person moves
at a constant speed. The expected length of the pattern-
string is set to the average of the length of the two pattern-
strings.

A movement-prediction is said to hold at a sensor if it sees
a pattern-string during the specied time interval , and
the length of the pattern-string is within A specied length.
Thus, if the specied time interval is [t1, t2], then we allow
the pattern to occur in the interval  . Also, if
the expected length of the pattern-string is  , then
all pattern-strings with length in the interval ,
 match with the prediction.

A movement prediction not only species the pattern that
a sensor-mote is about to see, but it also species the stable
value that the sensor-mote is expected to read once it has
seen the pattern. This exploits the observation that sensor-
motes typically see a constant reading after an object has
passed by.

The packet carrying movement prediction contains 5 elds:
type of prediction, the lower and higher time interval, the
predicted length of the pattern, and the expected stable
reading of the sensor once the event has occurred. The size
of the prediction packet is 8 bytes (including the 3 bytes of
header).