Periodic pattern discovery is an important problem in mining
time series data and has wide applications. A periodic
pattern is an ordered list of events, which repeats itself in
the event sequence. It is useful in characterizing the cyclic
behavior of the time series. As a newly developed research
area, most previous work on mining time series data addresses
the issue by utilizing the support (number of occurrences) as
the metric to identify the important patterns from the rest
[4, 13]. A qualified pattern in the support model must occur
sufficient number of times. In some applications, e.g., market
basket, such a model is proved to be very meaningful and im-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or' part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
KDD 01 San Francisco CA USA
Copyright ACM 2001 1-58113-391-x/01/08...$5.00
portant. However, in some other applications, the number of
occurrences may not represent the significance of a pattern.
Consider the following examples.
‧ Web server load. Consider a web server cluster consisting
of 5 servers. The workload on each server is measured
by 4 ranks: low, relatively low, relatively high, and high.
Then there are 45 = 1024 different events, one for each
possible combination of server states. Some preliminary
examination of the cluster states over time might show
that the state fluctuation complies with some periodic
behavior. Although the high workload on all servers may
occur at a much lower frequency than other states, pattern(
s) involving it may. be of more interests to some system
administrators if the occurrence of such pattern(s)
contradicts the prior expectation.
‧ Earthquake. Earthquakes occur very often in California.
It can be classified by its magnitude and type. Scientist
may be interested in knowing whether there exists any
inherent seismic period so that prediction can be made.
Note that any unidentified seismic periodicity involving
big earthquake is much more valuable even though it
occurs at a much lower frequency than smaller ones.
In the above examples, we can see that users may be interested
in not only the frequently occurred patterns, but also the
surprising patterns (i.e., beyond prior expectation) as well. A
large number of occurrences of an "expected" frequent pattern
sometimes may not be as interesting as a few occurrences of
an "expected" rare pattern. The support model is not ideal
for these applications because, in the support model, the occurrence
of a pattern carries the same weight (i.e., 1) towards
its significance, regardless of its likelihood of occurrence. Intuitively,
the assessment of significance of a pattern in a sequence
should take into account the expectation of pattern occurrence
(according to some prior knowledge). Recently, many research
has been proposed [1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15] towards this
objective. We will furnish an overview in the next section. In
this paper, a new model is proposed to characterize the class
of so-called surprising patterns (instead of frequent patterns).
We will see that our model not only has a solid theoretical
foundation but also allows an efficient mining algorithm.
The measure of surprise should have the following properties.
(1) The surprise of a pattern occurrence is anti-monotonic
with respect to the likelihood that the pattern may occur by
chance (or by prior knowledge). (2) The metric should have
some physical meaning, i.e., not arbitrary created. It is fortunate
that the information metric [2] which is widely studied
and used in the communication field can fulfill both requirements.
Intuitively, information is a measurement of how likely
a pattern will occur or the amount of "surprise" when a pattern
actually occurs. If a pattern is expected to occur frequently
based on some prior knowledge or by chance, then an
occurrence of that pattern carries less information. Thus, we
use information to measure the surprise of an occurrence of
a pattern. The information gain metric is introduced to represent
the accumulated information of a pattern in an event
sequence and is used to assess the degree of surprise of the
pattern. In the remainder of this paper, we refer to this model
as the information model.
The information model is different from the support model.
For a given minimum information gain threshold, let ‧ be the
set of patterns that satisfy this threshold. Under the support
model, in order to find all patterns in ‧ when event occurrence
frequencies are vastly different, the minimum support
threshold has to be set very low. A major problem could rise
from this: too many patterns discovered. This means that
the patterns with most information gain are buried in a sea
of patterns with relatively low information gain. This could
be a large burden for the end user to distinguish the surprising
patterns (i.e., patterns with high information gain) from
the rest. In addition, since a large number of patterns have
to be discovered, the support model may yield an inefficient
algorithm.
Although the information gain is a more meaningful metric
for the problems addressed previously, it does not preserve
the downward closure property (as the support does). For example,
the pattern (al, a2) may have enough information gain
while both (al,*) and (*,a2) do not. The ‧ symbol represents
the "don't care" position. We cannot take advantage of
the standard pruning technique (e.g., Apriori algorithm) developed
for mining association rules and temporal patterns [4].
Fortunately, we are able to identify the bounded information
gain property where patterns with inextensible prefixes could
not be surprising (given some information gain threshold) and
can be excluded from consideration at a very early stage. This
motivates us to devise a recursive algorithm as the core of our
pattern discovery tool, InfoMiner. In summary, this paper has
the following contributions.
‧ We propose a new mining problem that is to find surprising
periodic patterns in a sequence of data.
‧ The concepts of information and information gain are
proposed to measure the degree of surprise of the pattern
exhibited in a sequence of data.
‧ Since the downward closure does not hold with information
gain, we devise an efficient algorithm to mine the
surprising patterns and associated subsequences based
on the bounded information gain property that is preserved
by the information gain metric.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Some
related work is discussed in Section 2. We present the information
model in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the detailed
algorithm of finding patterns whose information gain is above
a certain threshold. Experimental results are shown in Section
5. Finally, we draw the conclusion in Section 6.