A query plan for a simple aggregate query can be divided
into two components. Since queries require data
from spatially distributed sensors, we need to deliver
records from a set of distributed nodes to a central
destination node for aggregation by setting up suitable
communication structures for delivery of sensor
records within the network. We call this part of a
query plan its communication component, and we call
the destination node the leader of the aggregation. In
addition, the query plan has a computation component
that computes the aggregate at the leader and potentially
computes already partial aggregates at intermediate
nodes.
Recall that power is one of the main design desiderata
when devising query processing strategies for sensor
networks. If we coordinating both the computation
and communication component of a query plan, we
can compute partial aggregates at intermediate nodes
as long as they are well-synchronized; this reduces the
number of messages sent and thus saves power. We
address synchronization in the next section, and consider
here three different techniques on how to integrate
computation with communication:
Direct delivery. This is the simplest scheme.
Each source sensor node sends a data packet consisting
of a record towards the leader, and the multi-hop
ad-hoc routing protocol will deliver the packet to the
leader. Computation will only happen at the leader
after all the records have been received.
Packet merging. In wireless communication, it is
much more expensive to send multiple smaller packets
instead of one larger packet, considering the cost of reserving
the channel and the payload of packet headers.
Since the size of a sensor record is usually small and
many sensor nodes in a small region may send packets
simultaneously to process the answer for a round
of a query, we can merge several records into a larger
packet, and only pay the packet overhead once per
group of records. For exact query answers with holistic
aggregate operators like Median, packet merging is
the only way to reduce the number of bytes transmitted
[10].
Partial aggregation. For distributive and algebraic
aggregate operators [10], we can incrementally
maintain the aggregate in constant space, and thus
push partial computation of the aggregate from the
leader node to intermediate nodes. Each intermediate
sensor node will compute partial results that contain
sufficient statistics to compute the final result.