Periodic pattern discovery is an important problem in mining
time series data and has wide applications. A periodic pattern
is a list of ordered events, which repeat itself in the event sequence.
It is useful in characterizing the cyclic behavior of the
time series. In practice, not every portion in the time series
may contribute to the periodicity. For example, a company’s
stock may often gain a couple of points at the beginning of
each trading session but it may not have much regularity at
later time. This kind of looser periodicity is often referred to
as partial periodicity. Moreover, due to some random noise,
a pattern may not always be repeated perfectly. In turn, the
event sequence can be viewed as a series of perfect pattern
repetitions with a few random replacements
of “replacement” is below some reasonable threshold, we may
regard that the pattern still exhibits in the event sequence.
As a newly developed research area, most previous work
on mining time series data addresses the issue by creating a
mapping to the association rule mining technique and therefore
uses the support and confidence as the metrics to identify the
Or equivalently, the event sequence would become a series of perfect repetitions
of some pattern after a few replacements (of events).
significant patterns from the rest. Most association rule mining
algorithms favor frequently occurred event(s) due to the nature
of the problem. However, patterns involving infrequent events
may also be as significant as (or even more significant than)
frequent events in an event sequence. This issue becomes more
critical when different events occur at divergent frequencies.
Information gain is introduced in [3, 4, 5, 6] to measure
the importance/significance of the occurrence of a pattern.
The information gain of an occurrence of a rare
event is high while the information gain of the occurrence
of a frequent event is low. Thus, we are able to find
the statistically significant patterns with the information gain
threshold. However, the major limitation of this model is
that it does not take into account where the occurrences
are in the sequence. Let’s take a look at two sequences:
The elements in
the two sequences are identical. The only difference is the order
of the events. The pattern
repeats perfectly in the
first half ofwhile it scatters in 
. The two patterns have
the same information gain in the two sequences. In some applications
(e.g., repeats discovery in bio-informatics domain),
a series of consecutive repeats are considered more significant
than the scattered ones. That is, there is some “penalty” associated
with the gap between pattern repeats [2]. As a result,
we need a measurement that can make such a distinction. In
this paper, we introduce the measure of generalized information
gain (GIG) to capture the significance of a pattern in a sequence/
subsequence. The occurrence of a pattern will be given
a position GIG while a mis-occurrence (or a gap) will generate
a negative GIG. The overall generalized information gain will
be the aggregate of all occurrences and mis-occurrences of the
pattern in a sequence/subsequence.

  Since the characteristics of a sequence may change over
time, many patterns may only be valid for a period of time.
The degree of significance (i.e., generalized information gain)
of a pattern may be diluted if we only consider the entire event
sequence. In addition, a user may be interested not only in a
significant pattern, but also where/when the pattern is significant
as well. In a DNA sequence, researchers are also interested
in which region a pattern is significant. The identification
of significant pattern in a subsequence is of great importance
in many applications. However, most previous research

focused on discovering patterns that are significant over the
entire data sequence[6]. In this paper, we relax the model by
allowing a pattern to be significant during a contiguous portion
of the entire sequence. A user is asked to specify the minimum
GIG a significant pattern must carry over a subsequence
of data. Upon satisfying this requirement, the subsequence(s)
that maximizes the GIG of a pattern will be identified. In the
previous example, the pattern is very significant in the
first half of, but may not be significant over the entire sequence.
Although the generalized information gain is a more meaningful
metric for the problems addressed previously, it does
not preserve the downward closure property (as the support
does).
take advantages of the standard pruning technique developed
for mining association rules. The observation that the triangle
inequality is still preserved by the generalized information
gain motivates us to devise a threefold algorithm as the core of
our pattern discovery tool, InfoMiner+.

1. First, the significant patterns involving one event are discovered.

2. Next, candidate patterns involving multiple events are
generated based on the triangle inequality.

3. All candidate patterns are validated and for each pattern
which is significant, the corresponding subsequence containing
the pattern is also identified.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
problem is formulated in Section 2 while our approach is presented
in Section 3. We conclude this paper in Section 4.