In this section, we outline the general strategy we use to
mine patterns that meet certain generalized information gain
threshold . There exist three challenges for mining patterns
with information gain: (1) The number of different patterns is
where    and 
 are the overall number of distinct events
and the maximum period length, respectively. Since 
 can
be quite large, e.g., in the thousands, it is infeasible to verify
each pattern against the data directly. Some pruning mechanism
has to be developed to circumscribe the search space. (2)
By definition, the generalized information gain measure does
not have the property of downward closure as the traditional
support measure does. For the sequence shown in Figure 2,
the generalized information gains8 of the pattern    and
   are            and
		  , respectively; while the generalized
information gain of    is        
	    , which is greater than that of    and
  . If the generalized information gain threshold is set
to   , then only    qualifies while the other two
do not. This prevents us from borrowing existing algorithms
developed for association rule problems to mine the qualified
patterns. (3) The subsequence concept introduced in this paper
poses a difficult challenge to determine when a subsequence
should start and end. If a pattern misses some “matches”, it
is hard to tell whether this signals the end of a subsequence or
this merely means some noise within a subsequence.
Fortunately, the triangle inequality holds for the generalized
information gain. In other word, for a set of complementary
patterns , the generalized information gain of the minimum
common superpattern (MCSP) of  is always less than
or equal to the sum of that of each individual pattern in  over
the same subsequence of events. For example, the generalized
information gain of    is less than the sum of that of
   and    over the same subsequence as demonstrated
in Figure 2. Inspired by this observation, we can first
collect the generalized information gain of all singular patterns,
and then generate candidate patterns by combining these singular
patterns. Figure 3 outlines our approach, STAMP. In the first
phase, the valid singular patterns are discovered. The second
phase generates the candidates of valid complex pattern based
on the candidates of valid singular patterns via triangle inequality.
Finally, STAMP verifies all candidates, and finds the corresponding
subsequence for each valid pattern so as to maximize
its generalized information gain. The maximum information
gain (MIG) counting is designed to determine whether an event
 may participate in a pattern 	 of period  and can discover all
valid singular patterns. However, the overall number of MIG
counters could be quite large. As a result, it is beneficial if the
number of MIG counters can be reduced to limit the number of
scans through the event sequence. We, thus, propose a pruning
technique, optimal information surplus (OIS), to prune
out disqualified periods of each event before the MIG counting.
The OIS pruning and MIG counting constitute the first phase of
STAMP. After MIG counting, the candidate complex patterns
are generated, and then verified. We will explain each component
in detail in the following sections.