Periodicy detection of time series data is a challenging prob-
lem of great importance in many real applications. Most
previous research in this area has assumed that the distur-
bance within a series of repetitions of a pattern, if any, would
not result in the loss of synchronization of subsequent occur-
rences of the pattern with previous occurrences [1]. Distur-
bance is allowed only in terms of \missing occurrences" but
not as general as any \insertion of random noise events".
However, this assumption is often too restrictive since we
may fail to detect an interesting pattern if some of its occur-
rences is misaligned due to inserted noise events. Consider
the application of inventory replenishment. The history of
inventory rell orders can be regarded as a symbol sequence.
Assume that the time between two replenishments of cold
medicine is normally a month. The rell order is led at the
beginning of each month. But suppose a major outbreak of
u causes an early rell at the 3rd week. Afterwards, even
though the replenishment frequency is back to once each
month, the rell time shifts to the 3rd week of a month.
Therefore, it would be desirable if the pattern can still be
recognized when the disturbance is within some reasonable
threshold.
In addition, the system behavior may change over time.
Some patterns may not be present all the time (but rather
within some time interval). Therefore, in this paper we
aim at mining periodic patterns that are signicant within
a subsequence of symbols which may contain disturbance of
length up to a certain threshold. Two parameters, namely
min rep and max dis, are employed to qualify valid patterns
and the symbol subsequence containing it, where this sub-
sequence in turn can be viewed as a list of valid segments
of perfect repetitions interleaved by disturbance. Each valid
segment is required to be of at least min rep contiguous rep-
etitions of the pattern and the length of each piece of dis-
turbance is allowed only as large as max dis. The intuition
behind this is that a pattern needs to repeat itself at least
a certain number of times to demonstrate its signicance
and periodicy. On the other hand, the disturbance between
two valid segments has to be within some reasonable bound.
Otherwise, it would be more appropriate to treat such dis-
turbance as a signal of \change of system behavior" instead
of random noise injected into some persistent behavior. The
parameter max dis acts as the boundary to separate these
two phenomena. For patterns satisfying these two require-
ments, our model will return the subsequence with the max-
imum overall repetitions. Note that, due to the presence of
disturbances, some subsequent valid segments may not be
well synchronized with the previous ones. This in turn would
impose a great challenge in the mining process.
Similar to [1], we allow a pattern to be partially lled to
enable a more exible model. For instance, (cold medi, *,
*, *) is a partial monthly pattern showing that the cold
medicine is reordered on the rst week of each month while
no strong regularity presents for the rest of the month. How-
ever, since we also allow the shifted occurrence of a valid
segment, this exible model poses a dicult problem to be
solved. For a given pattern P, its associated valid segments
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
KDD 2000, Boston, MA USA
c ACM 2000 1-58113-233-6/00/08 ...$5.00
may overlap. In order to nd the valid subsequence with
the most repetitions for P, we have to decide which valid
segment and more specically which portion of a valid seg-
ment should be selected. While it is relatively easy to nd
the set of valid segments for a given pattern, substantial dif-
culties lie on how to assemble these valid segments to form
the longest valid subsequence. As shown in Figure 1(b),
with min rep = 3, S1, S2, S3, and S4 are four valid seg-
ments of the pattern P = (d1; ; ). If max dis = 6, then
X in Figure 1(d) is the longest subsequence before S4 is
considered, which in turn makes Y the longest one. If we
only look at the symbol sequence up to position 10 without
looking ahead in the sequence, it is very dicult to deter-
mine whether we should switch to S2 or continue on S1.
This indicates that we may need to track multiple ongoing
subsequences simultaneously. Since the number of dierent
assemblages (of valid segments) grows exponentially with in-
creasing period length, the process to mine the longest sub-
sequence becomes a daunting task, even for a very simple
pattern such as (d1; ; ). To solve this problem for a given
pattern, a segment-based algorithm is developed to identify
subsequences that may be extended to become the longest
one and maintain them in such a way that the longest valid
subsequence can be identied by a single scan of the input
sequence.
Another innovation of our mining algorithm is that it can
discover all periodic patterns regardless of the period length.
Most previous research in this area focused on patterns for
some pre-specied period length [1] [2] or some pre-dened
calendar [3]. Unfortunately, in practice, the period is not
always available a priori (it is also part of what we want to
mine out from the data). A period may span thousands of
symbols in a long time series data or just a few symbols.
We rst introduce a distance-based pruning mechanism to
discover all possible periods and the set of symbols that are
likely to appear in some pattern of each possible period.
In order to nd the longest valid subsequence for all possi-
ble patterns, we employ a level-wise approach. The Apriori
property also holds on patterns of the same period. A valid
segment of a pattern is also a valid segment of any pattern
with fewer symbols specied in the pattern. For example,
a valid segment for (d1; d2; ) will also be one for (d1; ; ).
Then, for each likely period, all valid patterns with their
longest supporting subsequences can be mined via an itera-
tive process.
In summary, we claim the following contributions.
 A pattern can be partially specied, e.g., (d; ; ).
 A more exible model of asynchronous periodic pat-
terns is proposed to allow mining of all patterns (1)
whose periods can cover a wide range and are not
known a priori; (2) that present within only a subse-
quence; and (3) whose occurrences may be misaligned
due to the insertion of some random disturbance.
 A two phase algorithm is devised to rst generate po-
tential periods by distance-based pruning followed by
an iterative procedure to derive and validate candi-
date patterns and locate the longest valid subsequence
containing each pattern.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The gen-
eral model and the algorithm outline are presented in Sec-
tion 2. The algorithms of distance-based pruning, the sin-
gular pattern verication, and the complex pattern verica-
tion are elaborated in Sections 3, 4, 5, respectively. Section
6 presents experimental results. The conclusion is drawn in
Section 7.