3.2 Segment-based OIS Pruning To reduce the number of
singular patterns for collecting the MIG counts, we introduce a
pruning step OIS based on a concept to score consecutive periodic
appearances of an event based on generalized information
gain. OIS determines for each event, what are the likely periods
(or equivalently for each period, what are the likely events that
will have the period). For each likely period  of event , there
are  possible singular patterns, e.g., for   , the three singular
patterns are   ,   , and   . We then use the
MIG counters to screen these singular patterns. As we shall see
the OIS storage requirement is   
 which is substantially
lower than that of MIG counters and the OIS step can
greatly reduce the candidates for MIG counters. Consider the
occurrence of event  in an event sequence       .
Intuitively,  would generate the most information gain if it repeats
itself perfectly at a certain period in a subsequence of .
If  participates in some pattern of period , each occurrence
of  could contribute to the generalized information gain of the
pattern by an amount  in the optimistic scenario. However,
in most case, the net information gain that  can contribute to
a pattern is much smaller because (1) some information loss
would incur due to the absence of  at some position; (2) some
scattered/random occurrence of  has to be matched with the
eternal event *. For example, the circled position in Figure 4
is considered as an absence of  for pattern   . On the
other hand, the third occurrences of  have to be matched with
the eternal event for pattern   . It is obvious that all of
these suboptimal scenarios would weaken the net information
gain that  may contribute to any pattern. Since it is very complicated
to track all of them, we choose to consider only one
suboptimal scenario for estimating the information loss at this
moment: the distance between two consecutive occurrences is
greater than the length of the period. Let    be the set
of patterns of period  which contains . We employ the following
disciplines to estimate the OIS that an event  might
contribute to any pattern in   .
1. Each occurrence of  is considered to be a positive
contribution by amount .
2. When the distance between any two consecutive occurrences
is greater than , information loss must incur due
to the absence of . In fact, there are at least  	
 
absences, one for each segment following the previous occurrence
of . Each absence would cause an information
loss of .
Figure 5 shows the process to estimate the OIS that event 
could contribute to any pattern of period 3. Each occurrence introduces
a generalized information gain. There are three places
where the distances between two consecutive occurrences are 4,
5, and 7, respectively. Information loss of  incurs for each
period in these subsequence(s) deficient in .
These information losses and gains are essentially two
lists of real numbers, namely    and    in Figure
5(b). At the th occurrence of , we can easily compute
the the optimal net information surplus  could contribute
in any event subsequence ending at that position, denoted by
  . Let    be the maximum net information
aggregation of any subsequences ending exactly at the th occurrence
of . We have
In the formula for     , 	    
     represents the contribution from subsequence
ending at  and      represents the contribution from
  th position. Note that since      captures the
potential information loss in the portion of subsequence prior to
th position and should not affect the subsequence starting
at th position,    and    are treated
differently in the above formula. A linear algorithm would compute
all  values as illustrated in Figure 5(b). Note that the
OIS is an optimistic estimation and only gives an upperbound
of the generalized information gain that an event  would contribute
to any pattern. It is obvious that event  does not exhibit
strong pattern in Figure 5(a). However, the above OIS pruning
method overestimates the generalized information gain of   in
Figure 5(b). Therefore, we propose another more sophisticated,
but more effective OIS pruning method at the end of this section.
MIG Counter Generation after OIS Pruning After obtaining
OIS values, for each period length , we want to find which
event is likely to appear in a valid pattern of period . Let 
denote the set of such events. By definition, any pattern of
period  may contain at most  different events. The problem
can be converted to testing whether the combined OIS of a
set of  events may exceed the generalized information gain
threshold  at some position in the sequence. Even though
there are totally    
  different event combinations, it is
not necessary to examine all of them. Conceptually, each event
in a valid pattern must play a supporting role in accumulating
generalized information gain. Therefore, we only need to
consider the set of events with positive OIS at any time. (Note
that this set may vary over time.) As we mentioned before, the
event sequence can be treated as a list of segments of length
 as shown in Figure 6. Each segment might serve as the last
segment of a valid subsequence for some pattern.  need to
be updated at the end of each segment. Let    be the set
of events with positive OIS at the end of the  th segment, i.e.,
         ! 	,  is the last occurrence
of  before the end of the  th segment . For example,  and
 are the only events with positive OIS value in segment 3,
i.e.,     . Since the OIS value of an event  is
updated for each occurrence of , it might not be updated in
every segment and might also be updated multiple times within
a segment. In any case, we always use the most recent value
for the computation. In Figure 6, the OIS value of  is not
updated in segment 4 and is updated twice in segment 5. Then
the OIS value that we use for these two segments are 1.74 and
2.61, respectively.
For each segment  , let    be the set of events that
may appear in a pattern whose valid subsequence ends at the
 th segment.    is essentially a subset of    and can be
computed easily9. After we calculate    for all segments,
the set  can be trivially obtained by taking the union, i.e.,
  
   . Figure 6 shows the process to compute the
candidate events for period . Note that a single scan of the
event sequence is sufficient to compute the candidate events for
all possible periods. For any given period , if the candidate
event set  is empty, then no pattern of period  would be able
to meet the required generalized information gain. Once 
is determined, for each event in , we proceed to determine
the singular pattern candidates with period  using the MIG
counters. A counter is initialized for each event   
at each position in the period. There are totally    
counters where    is the cardinality of . For example,
     for period . There are 3 different positions
an event may occupy in a period. In turn, 3 MIG counters are
initialized for each event, one for each position as illustrated in
Figure 7(a). The procedure presented in the previous subsection
is then carried out to collect all these MIG counters.