5.1.1 Sequential Patterns Discovering frequent sequential
patterns was first introduced in [1]. The input data is a set of
sequences, called data-sequences. Each data-sequence is a list
of transactions and each transaction consists of a set of items. A
sequential pattern also consists of a (fully ordered) list of transactions.
The problem is to find all frequent sequential patterns
with a user-specified minimum support, where the support of a
sequential pattern is the percentage of data-sequences that contain
the pattern. Apriori-based algorithms, such as AprioriALL
[1] and GSP [24], were proposed to mine patterns with some
minimum supports in a level-wise manner. To further improve
the performance, a projection-based algorithm called FreeSpan
[11] and its successor PrefixSpan [21] were introduced to reduce
the candidate patterns generated and hence reduce the number
of scans through the data. Additional useful constraints (such
as time constraint and regular expression constraint) and/or taxonomies
were also studied extensively in [8, 24, 29] to enable
more powerful models of sequential patterns.
As a more generative model, the problem of discovering
frequent episodes from a sequence of events was presented
in [15]. An episode is defined to be a collection of events
that occur relatively close to each other in a given partial
order. A time window is moved across the input sequence
and all episodes that occur in some user-specified percentage
of windows are reported. The model was further generalized by
Padmanabhan et al. [17] to suit temporal logic patterns.
5.1.2 Periodic Patterns Full cyclic pattern was first studied
in [16]. The input data to [16] is a set of transactions, each of
which consists a set of items. In addition, each transaction is
tagged with an execution time. The goal is to find association
rules that repeat themselves throughout the input data. In
[9, 10], Han et. al. presented algorithms for efficiently mining
partial periodic patterns. In practice, not every portion in the
time series may contribute to the periodicity. For example,
a company’s stock may often gain a couple of points at the
beginning of each trading session but it may not have much
regularity at later time. This type of looser periodicity is often
referred to as partial periodicity. The difference between our
model and [9, 10] is that we aim at mining statistically important
periodic patterns while Han et al. focused on frequent periodic
patterns.
  The most related work is the InfoMiner proposed in [27].
The InfoMiner uses the information gain as the measure of
the interestingness of a pattern. However, there is no penalty
for a gap between the occurrences of the pattern. In the
STAMP model, we allow penalty to be associated with the gap
between pattern occurrences (which is more suitable for many
applications such as bioinformatics) and focus on devising
efficient algorithms to mining patterns under this new model.