Monitoring operations in sensor networks do not have some
of the constraints that are present in video encoding. We
summarize the fundamental dierences below along with
their eect on the algorithms:

 The most prominent difference is that live video en-
coding is constrained by hard real-time requirements
whereas monitoring in sensor networks has soft real-
time requirements (of generating the prediction and
transmitting it to sensor before the predicted events
occur). The hard real-time constraint causes the MPEG
encoder to generate motion-vectors based on a small
number of previous image frames. Also, it uses very
simple algorithms for the purpose. Thus, one may view
motion-vectors in MPEG as based on patterns occur-
ring on a very small time-scale. In sensor networks,
since the real-time constraint is relaxed, the algorithms
may look for patterns not only on small time-scales,
but also on medium and large time-scales. Further-
more, the algorithms in sensor networks may aord to
spend more time in generating prediction-models.
 In sensor networks, energy of the sensors is the most
precious resource. This is not so in video encoding. As
a result, the PREMON paradigm attempts to save en-
ergy by generating prediction-models at base station.
While in MPEG, motion-vectors are a bandwidth-eAcient
way of encoding the current picture based on the pre-
vious picture. Although MPEG tries to be as band-
width eAcient as possible, this requirement is only soft.
Whereas, in sensor networks, better bandwidth utiliza-
tion and extreme energy-eAciency is a requirement.

Thus, there is a need for improving the accuracy of
predictions and the frequency with which such predic-
tions are made.

 The resolution of the image that MPEG works on is
very high compared to that of the image that PRE-
MON works on. Given the small radio-range of a sen-
sor (approximately 100 feet in outdoor environment),
and that all the sensors in a cluster need to be in the
radio-range of the base station, we expect that the
number of sensors (sensing a moving phenomenon) will
be very small compared to the number of pixels in an
image frame of a video. This small size signicantly re-
duces the computation involved in performing motion-
estimation.
 The frame rate in MPEG is an order of magnitude
higher compared to the expected frame rate in PRE-
MON. This allows techniques in PREMON to do mo-
tion estimation/compensation based on a set of previ-
ous frames.
 Since sensors are rarely hand-placed in the target en-
vironment, the arrangement of sensors in the eld is
going to be random. Thus the image visualization of
the sensor network will have non-uniform placement of
pixels in the image. On the other hand, the pixels in
a video have a very uniform pattern. In section 3.2.6,
we discuss techniques to handle this.