The prediction models may be classied into four categories:
 Spatial: These prediction models specify the reading
3A prediction-model is a concise representation of the read-
ings that a sensor is expected to sense in the near future

at a sensor as a function of the readings at nearby
sensors. Example: \Reading at sensor X in time slot
t is the same as reading at sensor Y during the same
time slot".
 Temporal: These prediction models specify the reading
at a sensor as a function of its readings in the past.
Example: \Reading at sensor X in time slot t is 2
greater than its reading in the previous time slot".
 Spatio-temporal: A combination of the above two. Ex-
ample: \Reading at sensor X in time slot t is the same
as the reading of sensor Y in the previous time slot".
 Absolute: These prediction models directly specify the
readings that a sensor is going to sense in the near
future. The readings may be specied as a list of tu-
ples <time, reading>, or they may be specied by a
function. Unlike spatial or temporal models however,
the function neither depends on any past reading of
the sensor, nor on the reading of any nearby sensor.
Example: \Readings at sensor X in time slots t, t+1,
and t+2 will be 32, 34, and 35 respectively".

In some cases, one may need to represent spatial, temporal,
or spatio-temporal prediction model as an absolute predic-
tion model. This happens when the readings on which future
readings depend, are not available at the sensor. for exam-
ple, if a sensor only stores a limited amount of history, then
readings needed to compute a temporal model may not be
available. Similarly, if a sensor can hear only a few neighbor-
ing sensors, then the readings of sensors needed to compute
a spatial model may not be available to it.
A prediction model is always qualied with a time inter-
val in which it is valid. At the end of the time interval,
the prediction model expires and the sensor reverts to the
update-mode described earlier.