Periodic pattern discovery is an important problem in mining
time series data and has wide applications. A periodic pattern
is a list of ordered events, which repeats itself in the event
sequence. It is useful in characterizing the cyclic behavior of
the time series. In practice, not every portion in the time series
may contribute to the periodicity. For example, a company’s
stock may often gain a couple of points at the beginning of
each trading session but it may not have much regularity at
a later time. This kind of looser periodicity is often referred
to as partial periodicity [10]. Moreover, due to some random
noise, a pattern may not always be repeated perfectly. In turn,
the event sequence can be viewed as a series of perfect pattern
repetitions with a few random replacements1. If the amount
of “replacement” is below some reasonable threshold, we may
regard that the pattern still exhibits in the event sequence.
As a newly developed research area, most previous work
on mining time series data addresses the issue by creating a
mapping to the association rule mining technique [9, 10] and
therefore uses the support and confidence as the metrics to
identify the significant patterns from the rest. Most association
rule mining algorithms favor frequently occurred event(s) due
to the nature of the problem. However, patterns involving
infrequent events may also be as significant as (or even more
significant than) frequent events in an event sequence. This
issue becomes more critical when different events occur at
divergent frequencies.
  Information gain is introduced in [27] to measure the importance/
significance of the occurrence of a pattern. The information
gain of an occurrence of a rare event is high while
the information gain of the occurrence of a frequent event is
low. Thus, we are able to find the statistically significant patterns
with the information gain threshold. However, the ma-
jor limitation of this model is that it does not take into account
where the occurrences are in the sequence. Let’s take a look at
two sequences:              
and              . The elements
in the two sequences are identical. The only difference
is the order of the events. The pattern   repeats perfectly
in the first half of  while it scatters in . The two
patterns have the same information gain in the two sequences.
In some applications (e.g., repeats discovery in bio-informatics
domain), a series of consecutive repeats are considered more
significant than the scattered ones. That is, there should be some
“penalty” associated with the gap between pattern repeats. As a
result, the measure of generalized information gain (GIG) was
introduced [28] to capture the significance of a pattern in a sequence/
subsequence. The occurrence of a pattern will be given
a positive GIG while a mis-occurrence (or a gap) will generate
a negative GIG. The overall generalized information gain will
be the aggregate GIG of all occurrences and mis-occurrences of
the pattern in a sequence/subsequence.
  Since the characteristics of a sequence may change over
time, many patterns may only be valid for a period of time.
The degree of significance (i.e., generalized information gain)
of a pattern may be diluted if we only consider the entire
event sequence. In addition, a user may be interested not
only in a significant pattern, but also where/when the pattern is
significant as well. The identification of significant pattern in a
subsequence is of great importance in many applications. In our
proposed scheme, a user can specify the minimum GIG that a
significant pattern must carry over a subsequence of data. Upon
satisfying this requirement, the subsequence(s) that maximizes
the GIG of a pattern will be identified. In the previous example,
the pattern   is very significant in the first half of , but
may not be significant over the entire sequence.
Although the generalized information gain is a more meaningful
metric for the problems addressed previously, it does not
preserve the downward closure property (as the support does).
For example, the pattern    may have sufficient GIG
while both    and    do not2. We can not take advantages
of the standard pruning technique developed for mining
association rules. The observation that the triangle inequality3
is still preserved by the generalized information gain motivates
us to devise a threefold algorithm as the core of our pattern
discovery tool, STAMP.

1. First, the significant patterns involving one event are discovered.
Two novel strategies, optional information surplus
pruning and maximum information gain counting,
are proposed to dramatically reduce the search space.
2. Next, candidate patterns involving multiple events are
generated based on the triangle inequality.
3. All candidate patterns are validated and for each pattern
which is significant, the corresponding subsequence containing
the pattern is also identified.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
model of generalized information gain and its properties are presented
in Section 2 while the algorithm of STAMP is presented
in Section 3. Section 4 presents some experiment results. We
discuss some related work in Section 5. Finally, the conclusion
is drawn in Section 6.