To perform packet merging or partial aggregation, we
need to coordinate sensor nodes within the communication
component of a query plan. A node n needs
to decide whether other nodes n1, . . . , nk are going to
route data packets through n; in this case n has the
opportunity of either packet merging or partial aggregation.
Thus a node n needs to build a list of nodes
it is expecting messages from, and it needs to decide
how long to wait before sending a message to the next
hop.
For duplicate sensitive aggregate operators, like
SUM and AVG, one prerequisite to perform partial aggregation
is to send each record only once, otherwise
duplicate records might appear in partially aggregated
results and bias the result, thus a simple spanning
tree might be a suitable communication structure. For
other aggregate operators, including MAX and MIN,
it is possible to send multiple copies of a record along
different paths without any influence on the query accuracy;
thus a suitable communication structure might
be a DAG rooted at the leader.
The task of synchronization in this tree or DAG is
then for each node in each round of the query to determine
how many sensor readings to wait for and when
to perform packet merging or partial aggregation.
Incremental Time Slot Algorithm. Let us first
discuss the following simple algorithm. At the beginning
of a round, each sensor node sets up a timer,
and waits for a special waiting time for data packets
from its children in the spanning tree or DAG to arrive.
The length of the timer at node n is set to the
depth of the structure rooted at n times a standardized
time slot. However, this algorithm has a large
cost in reality. First, it is very difficult to determine in
advance how long a node needs to collect records from
its children. The time to process the data, schedule
the packet, reserve the channel, and retransmit packets
due to frequently temporary link failures can vary
significantly. Although the expected size of a time slot
is small, it has a heavy tail with a big variance. But
if the time slot is too large, the accumulated delay at
the leader could be very long if the depth of the tree
or DAG is large.
Second, with frequent link failures, it is expensive to
update the time-out value every time the structure of
the communication structure changes. Although most
broken links can be repaired locally, repairs may effect
the depth of a large number of nodes, and it is expensive
to update the timer for all of these nodes. Third,
sensor nodes are never completely time-synchronized
unless expensive time synchronization protocols or frequent
GPS readings are used.
Our Approach. We take a very pragmatic approach
to synchronization. Note that for a longrunning
query, the communication behavior between
two sensors n and p is consistent over short periods of
time, so it is possible to use historical information to
predict future behavior. Assuming that p is the parent
of node n. After p receives a record from n, it may
expect to receive another record from n in the next
round, and thus p adds n to its waiting list. However,
such prediction may fail in two cases. First, the
parent of node n may change in the next round if n
reroutes and has a new parent due to network topology
changes and route updates. Second, n could perform
a local selection on its records, and only send a record
to p if the selection condition is satisfied. Such conditions
are only satisfied from time to time, and make
the prediction at p fail.
In our approach, we use a timer to recover from false
prediction at parent nodes. On the other hand, since
a child node is able to determine whether its parent
is expecting a packet from it, the child can generate a
notification packet if its parent’s prediction is wrong.
We found that this bi-directional prediction approach
model the relationship between the parent and child
nodes very well in practice, as shown in Section 6.