4.4 Overall Performance The overall performance of
STAMP depends largely on the number of MIG counters and
candidate patterns. If MIG counters and candidate patterns
can not fit into main memory, then multiple scans of the
event sequence is needed to generate the counters or verify
the candidate patterns. For all four sequences, after the OIS
counting, the MIG counters can fit into the main memory.
However, the candidate patterns can not fit into main memory
at once. One third of the candidate patterns of 					
sequence can be loaded into memory each time while half
of the candidate patterns of the other three sequences can be
loaded into memory each time for   . Figure 13(a) shows
the overall response time of STAMP for four event sequences
with respect to the generalized information gain threshold.
The average performance of 	, 			, and 		 is
similar because of the similar number of disk I/Os whereas the
performance of 					 is significantly higher.
To analyze the benefits of using the generalized information
gain as a threshold versus using support and confidence as
thresholds, we also implemented a data mining tool which finds
the subsequences with maximum support while maintaining
the confidence and support above certain thresholds. We call
this subsequence discovery tool s-c Miner. In s-c Miner, an
approach similar to [10] is used to generate all patterns that
satisfy the support threshold followed by an algorithm adapted
from [7] to find the desired subsequence. Figure 13 (b) shows
the performance difference between STAMP and s-c Miner.
(Note the y-axis in Figure 13 (b) is in log scale.) Since the
performance on all four sequences is similar, thus, we only
show the performance of sequence 	. The support and
confidence thresholds in s-c Miner is set in such a way that all
subsequences found by STAMP can also be found by s-c Miner.
Since a large number of patterns are generated by s-c Miner
which are not deemed as valid by STAMP, the performance of
s-c Miner is severely impact. However, readers should keep in
mind that in some applications, if the support and confidence
are the proper measurement to qualify a valid pattern, then the
s-c Miner should be preferred.