In this section, we outline the general strategy we use to mine
patterns that meet certain generalized information gain threshold
 . There exist three challenges for mining patterns with
information gain: (1) The number of different patterns is

where and are the overall number of distinct events
and the maximum period length, respectively. Since can
be quite large, e.g., in the thousands, it is infeasible to verify
each pattern against the data directly. Some pruning mechanism
has to be developed to circumscribe the search space. (2)
By definition, the generalized information gain measure does
not have the property of downward closure as the traditional
support measure does. This prevents us from borrowing existing
algorithms developed for association rule problems to
mine the qualified patterns. (3) The subsequence concept introduced
in this paper poses a difficult challenge to determine
when a subsequence should start and end. If a pattern misses
some “matches”, it is hard to tell whether this signals the end
of a subsequence or this merely means some noise within a
subsequence.
  Fortunately, the triangle inequality holds for the generalized
information gain. In other word, for a set of complementary
patterns II, the generalized information gain of the
minimum common superpattern (MCSP) of II is always less
than or equal to the sum of that of each individual pattern in II
over the same subsequence of events. Inspired by this observation,
we can first collect the generalized information gain of
all singular patterns, and then generate candidate patterns by
combining these singular patterns.

  In the first phase, the valid singular patterns are discovered.
The second phase generates the candidates of valid complex
pattern based on the candidates of valid singular patterns via
triangle inequality. Finally, InfoMiner+ verifies all candidates,
and finds the corresponding subsequence for each valid pattern
so as to maximize its generalized information gain. The
first phase can be further divided into two steps: (1) identify
the likely periods for each event and (2) find the valid singular
pattern for each likely period. In the first step, the negative
impact of gap penalties towards the overall GIG is taken into
account to prune out disqualified periods of each event; while
in the second step all possible format of singular patterns are
considered and evaluated. For each likely period ιof event
a, there are ι possible singular patterns, e.g., for ι = 3,the
three singular patterns are ,and . Af-
ter valid singular patterns are identified, the candidate complex
patterns are generated according to the triangle inequality, and
then verified. At the same time, for each significant pattern, we
will find its associated subsequences. Due to space limitations,
we omit the detailed description of the InfoMiner+ algorithm.
