We implement the prototype in C and execute on an IBM
RS-6000 (300 MHz CPU) with 128MB running an AIX op-
erating system. In the following experiments, we always set
For the purpose of performance evaluation, we use a synthet-
ically generated sequence consisting of 1024 distinct symbols
and 20M occurrences of symbols. The synthetic sequence is
generated as follows. The period length l of the next pattern
is selected based on a geometric distribution with mean 50.
The number of symbols involved in a pattern is randomly
chosen between 1 and the period l. The number of valid seg-
ments is chosen according to a geometrical distribution with
mean 50. The number of repetitions of each valid segment
follows a geometrical distribution with mean 1000. After
each valid segment, the length of the disturbance is deter-
mined based on a geometrical distribution with mean 1000.
This process repeats until 20M symbols are generated.

We rst investigate the eects of distance-based pruning.
Without the distance-based pruning, there could be as many
as j = j Lmax dierent single patterns (d; ; : : : ; ) (8d 2
=). Figure 2(a) shows the fraction of patterns eliminated
by distance-based pruning. It is evident that the number of
pruned patterns is a monotonically increasing function of the
min rep threshold. With a reasonable min rep threshold,
only a small portion of potential single patterns need to be
validated and used to generate candidate complex patterns.

After the distance-based pruning, each remaining potential
single pattern is validated through the SB algorithm. Since
the validation process (even for a given pattern) is not a triv-
ial task, we demonstrate the eciency of our SB algorithm
by comparing it with a reasonable two stage (TS) algorithm.
In the TS algorithm, for a given pattern, all valid segments
are rst discovered, then all possible combinations of valid
segments are tested and the one with the most repetition is
chosen. Figure 2(b) shows the average elapse time of vali-
dating a pattern. (Note that the Y-axis is in log scale.) It is
evident that SB algorithm can outperform the TS algorithm
by at least one order of magnitude regardless the min rep
threshold. Figure 2(c) and (d) show the space utilization
in the SB algorithm and the overall response time to nd
all patterns, respectively. Clearly, the higher the min