2.1 Issues on Database Broadcasting
In our approach, a relational database is first vertically
partitioned into fragments based on attributes. The values
of each attribute in a relation are sequentially allocated in
the broadcast channel. To integrate the attribute values of a
tuple from the broadcast channel, each attribute value is
associated with a tuple number indicating the tuple the
attribute value belongs to. As mentioned above, the clients
access the attributes involved in the queries according to the
query optimization order. In conventional query optimization,
the selection operations are performed first to reduce
the size of the temporary results. Therefore, for reducing the
tuning time, the values of the select attributes should be
retrieved to process prior to the values of the other
attributes in the broadcast channel.
We transform the query in SQL into a query pattern in the
format [SA, JA, PA], where SA (select attributes) is the set of
attributes in the where-clause by the format x  c, where x is
an attribute,  is a comparison operator, and c is a constant,
JA (join attributes) is the set of attributes in the where-clause
by the format x  y, where x and y are attributes, and PA
(project attributes) is the set of attributes in the select-clause.
If the intersection of SA, JA, and PA is not empty, we
remove the duplicate attributes from the sets in the order of
PA, JA, and SA. The square bracket of the query pattern
indicates the query processing order. That is, attributes in
SA should be accessed before attributes in JA and attributes
in PA should be accessed last. Among the attributes in SA,
JA, or PA, there is no order constraint. For example, assume
there are three relations to be broadcast. The corresponding
attributes of each relation are listed below.
relation A ? ea1; a2T; relation B ? eb1; b2T;
relation C ? ec1; c2T:
A broadcast order of the attributes is called a broadcast
program. a1b1b2a2c1c2 or a1b1a2c2c1b2 are both possible
broadcast programs. Consider the following query:
Select a2; b2
From A, B
Where a1 < 20 and a1 ? b1
In this query, SA ? fa1g, JA ? fb1g (because a1 2 SA, it
is removed from JA), and PA ? fa2; b2g. The client first
tunes in the broadcast channel to download a1 and perform
the selection operation on the values of attribute a1. Then,
the client downloads b1 and performs the join operation
with the values of the selection results of attribute a1. After
that, we get pairs of tuple numbers denoting the tuples in
relations A and B which are joined together and satisfy the
query conditions in the where-clause. Through these tuple
numbers, the relevant values of attributes a2 and b2 are then
downloaded to be the answer of the query.