The algorithms of the previous sections select the top-K
most promising peers and get the top-k results from each
one. A naive approach to improving the recall is simply by
increasing K. In this section, we describe an algorithm that
achieves a recall that is higher than the one gained by the
naive approach. The algorithm increases K, but it does so in
stages as follows. Initially, K = k and the algorithm selects
the top-k most promising peers, and each one of them sends
its top-k documents to the initiating peer. Let mink be the
minimal score among the top-k documents obtained from
the k × k results. When applying Expression (1) again, we
would like to exclude all documents d that cannot have a
score higher than mink. We do it as follows.
Let h = (h1, . . . , hn) be a tuple of C. Recall that score(h)
is obtained by applying the aggregate function f to the middle
points of the hj . We similarly define high(h), except that
f is computed over the highest endpoints of the hj, namely,
high(h) = f(high(h1), . . . , high(hn)) (3)
where high(hj) is the right endpoint of the interval hj .
For example, consider again the tuple h = (3, 4) and the
first group (first row) in the histograms of Figure 1. Then,
high(h) = f(0.8, 1.0), which is 1.8 if f is sum.
The following Lemma gives a lower bound on the score of
documents that can be among the top-k (instead of some of
those that are in the current top-k).
Lemma 4.1. Let mink be the minimal score among the
current top-k results. Consider a tuple h ? C. If high(h) <
mink, then there is no document d in h that can replace any
of the current top-k results.
Proof. Suppose that a document d is in h. By definition,
high(h) is an upper bound on the score of d. Therefore,
scoreq(d) < mink.
We use the above lemma as follows. When evaluating
Expression (1), we eliminate from the sum all tuples h ? C,
such that high(h) < mink. Thus, we get a better estimate
of the expected score of a random document (of the given
group), because we compute it only over documents that can
still be among the top-k.
To summarize, the algorithm works as follows. In each
stage, it selects the next top-k most promising peers by using
the remaining histograms (i.e., of the peers that have not
yet been chosen). The selection is done by applying Expression
(1) as described above. After the selection is made, the
initiating peer gets the top-k documents from each of the
selected peers, updates its list of the top-k results, updates
mink, and then continues to the next stage. The algorithm
can safely terminate when high(h) < mink holds for all the
remaining h.
In practice, this termination condition is rarely reached
before selecting a large portion of the peers, because high(h)
is a very rough upper bound on the actual score of documents
in h.
The experiments of Section 5 show that the adaptive peer
selection improves the recall. In fact, we even apply a more
aggressive strategy by taking mink to be the score of the
document in position k/2. This strategy gives, in practice,
a better improvement compared to using mink.