The following lemma will be used when determining the
access order:
Lemma 3. Given a set of ordered access pairs, assume there exist
two pairs, say ; d and ; c with access frequencies fcd and
fdc, respectively. If fcd > fdc, then the two pairs can be
replaced by the ordered access pair ; d (named a replacement
pair) with access frequency fcd 	 fdc without affecting the
derivation of an optimal broadcast program.
Proof. Fig. 3 shows two broadcast programs X and Y
containing data objects c and d. For the original set of
ordered access pairs, the difference of the average access
times for broadcast program X and broadcast program Y is
where x denotes rc!d in broadcast program X, y denotes
 in broadcast program Y, and W denotes the
summation of the access frequencies of the ordered
access pairs in the original set of ordered access pairs.
For the ordered access pairs containing the replacement
pair, the difference of the average access times for
broadcast program X and broadcast program Y is
where W0 denotes the summation of the access frequencies
of the ordered access pairs containing the replacement
pair.
Because bothWandW0 are positive numbers, the sign
of the two differences is the same. Therefore, the optimal
broadcast programs for the original set of ordered access
pairs and the one containing the replacement pair are the
same. tu
We use an example to illustrate how Lemma 3 works.
Example 1. Given query pattern1 query
pattern2 ; fa; dg; fb; eg with access frequency
f2 , and query pattern3  fdg; fhg with access
frequency f3  10. In Step 1 of the access order
determination process, the known access order is used
to determine the access order of the data objects in {}.
According to query pattern1, we know data object b
should be accessed before data object e. Therefore, query
pattern2 can be revised to. According to
query pattern2, we know data object d should be
accessed before data object e. However, according to
query pattern3, data object e should be accessed before
data object d. By Lemma 3, we know that data object d
should be accessed before data object e with an access
frequency 30-10. Therefore, query pattern1 can be
revised to.
