Consider the following scenario: A sensor network consists of X sensors. This network
tracks the values of certain variables like temperature, air pressure, humidity, etc. Let
V = {V1, V2, ...VN} be the N variables tracked by the network. Each sensor is equally likely
to track any of these N variables. Assume that we are interested in finding the answer to a
query Q = {Q1,Q2, ...QM} consisting of M sub-queries, 1 < M  N and 8i : i  M,Qi 2 V .
Let SM be the average number of steps taken to resolve a query consisting of M sub-queries.
We define the number of steps as the number of nodes to which the query is forwarded before
being completely resolved. Define d as the look-ahead parameter. Let the neighborhood of a
sensor consist of all sensors within d hops away from it. In general the number of sensors in
the neighborhood is dependent on the node density, the transmission range of the sensors,
etc. However, we make the following assumptions about the sensor placement and their
characteristics:
1. The sensors are laid out uniformly in a region.
Figure 2: Illustration of traditional flooding-based queries (a), (b), (c), and ACQUIRE (d) in a
sample sensor network.
Figure 3: Illustration of ACQUIRE with a one-hop lookahead (d = 1). At each step of the
active query propagation, the node carrying the active query employs knowledge gained due to
the triggered updates from all nodes within d hops in order to partially resolve the query. As d
becomes larger, the active query has to travel fewer steps on average, but this also raises the update
costs. When d becomes extremely large, ACQUIRE starts to resemble traditional flooding-based
querying.
2. All the sensors have the same transmission range.
3. The nodes are stationary and do not fail.
We model the size of a sensor’s neighborhood (the number of nodes within d hops) as a
function of d, f(d), which is assumed to be independent of the particular node in question3.
We also assume that all possible queries Q are resolvable by this network (i.e. can be
responded to by at least one node in the network).
Mechanism of Query Forwarding:
Initially, let sensor x be the querier that issues a query Q consisting of M subqueries4. Let
d be the look-ahead parameter i.e each sensor can request information from sensors d hops
away from it. In general when a sensor x gets a query it does the following:
1. Local Update: If its current information is not up-to-date, x sends a request to all
sensors within d hops away. This request is forwarded hop by hop. The sensors who
get the request will then forward their information to x. Let the energy consumed in
this phase be Eupdate. Detailed analysis of Eupdate will be done in section 4.3.
2. Forward: After answering the query based on the information obtained, x then forwards
the remaining query to a node that is chosen randomly from those d hops away.
Since the update is only triggered when the information is not fresh, it makes sense to try to
quantify how often such updates will be triggered. We model this update frequency by an
average amortization factor c, such that an update is likely to occur at any given node only
once every 1
c queries. In other words the cost of the update at each node is amortized over
1
c queries, where c  1. For example, if on average an update has to be done once every 100
queries, c = 0.015.
After the query is completely resolved, the last node which has the query returns the completed
response6 to the querier x along the reverse path 7. We use  to denote the expected
number of hops from the node where the query is completely resolved to x.
Let SM be the average number of steps to answer a query of size M. Thus, the average
energy consumed to answer a query of size M with look-ahead d can be expressed as follows:
Now, if d = D, where D is the diameter of the network, x can resolve the entire query
in one step without forwarding it to any other node. However, in this case, Eavg will be
considerably large. On the other hand, if d is too small, a larger number of steps SM will be
required. In general, SM reduces with increasing d, while Eupdate increases with increasing d.
It is therefore possible, depending on other parameters, that the optimal energy expenditure
is incurred at some intermediate value of d. One of the main objectives of our analysis is to
analyze the impact of parameters such as M, N, c, and d upon the energy consumption Eavg
of ACQUIRE.