4.3 Merging Access Trees
As mentioned in Section 2, the output of the maximum
branching algorithm is an access forest. Therefore, in
addition to scheduling each access tree, we also need to
merge the scheduling results of the access trees. In the
access forest, if there is no removed edge between the access
trees, we can simply concatenate the scheduling results of
the access trees for the broadcast. If there exist some
removed edges between the access trees, i.e., the REinter is
not empty, the edges in REinter are used to merge the results
of access tree scheduling.
In order to schedule an access forest, we consider each
access tree as a vertex. An access graph Gf with each vertex
representing an access tree can then be generated by
creating edges between the vertices. For an access tree X,
define a membership function InXeiT, which returns 1 if a
vertex i is in X. Otherwise, it returns 0. For two access trees
X and Y, if
is not zero, an edge eXY is created in Gf with
Moreover, the size of the vertex which represents the access
tree X (VX;EX) is set to
P
i2Vx
kik. Fig. 13 shows the Gf
constructed from the access forest in Fig. 12. After creating
Gf , the process shown in Fig. 7 is used to schedule Gf . The
process will repeat until no edge can be created for a new
Gf . The merging algorithm is presented as follows:
Merging Algorithm
1. Create Gf
2. If there is no edge in Gf
3. Concatenate the scheduling results of the access
trees represented by the vertices in Gf
4. Stop
5. Apply the Access Graph RefinementAlgorithm to Gf
6. Run the maximum branching algorithm
7. For each access tree t in the access forest
8. Apply the Scheduling Algorithm on t
9. Goto Step 1
According to the Merging algorithm, the broadcast
program of the access forest can be determined. Therefore,
we only need to concatenate the OLO of each access tree
according to the broadcast program determined by the
Merging Algorithm to obtain a broadcast program. Fig. 14
Fig. 14. The merging result and the final broadcast program for the
access graph in Fig. 6a.

shows the merging result of the Gf shown in Fig. 13 and the
final broadcast program based on the merging result.