5.1 The Derivation of Lower Bounds
5.1.1 The Lower Bound on the Average Access Time for
a Set of Query Patterns
The lower bound on the average access time for the optimal
broadcast program of the query patterns is derived as
follows:
The notations used in the following equations are
defined first.
SAj: The SA set of the jth query pattern.
JAj: The JA set of the jth query pattern.
PAj: The PA set of the jth query pattern.
jSAjj: The number of data objects in SAj.
di
SAj	JAj : The number of data buckets needed to reach the
data objects in JAj after all the data objects in SAj are
downloaded when the ith data object in SAj is the first
downloaded data object. The meaning of di
SAj	JAj is
shown in Fig. 15.
di
JAj	PAj : The number of data buckets needed to reach the
data objects in PAj after all the data objects in SAj and JAj
are downloaded when the ith data object in SAj is the
first downloaded data object. The meaning of di
JAj	PAj is
shown in Fig. 15.
di
SAj : The number of data buckets needed to download all
the data objects in SAj when the ith data object in SAj is
the first downloaded data object. The meaning of di
SAj is
shown in Fig. 16.
di
JAj : The number of data buckets needed to download all
the data objects in JAj when the ith data object in SAj is
the first downloaded data object. The meaning of di
JAj is
shown in Fig. 16.
di
PAj : The number of data buckets needed to download all
the data objects in PAj when the ith data object in SAj is
the first downloaded data object. The meaning of di
PAj is
shown in Fig. 16.
wj: The access frequency of the jth query pattern.
n: The number of query patterns.
W: The total access frequencies of the query patterns, i.e.,

For a query pattern [SA, JA, PA], data objects in SA
should be accessed before data objects in JA and data
objects in PA are accessed last. Among the data objects in
SA, JA, or PA, there is no access order constraint. There are
six steps to access the data objects in a query pattern. First, a
client tunes in the broadcast channel and waits to access a
data object in SA. Notice that the first data object to be
accessed can be any data object in SA. For example,
referring to Fig. 15, the first data object to be accessed can
be data object a or data object b. Second, all the data objects
in SA are downloaded. Third, it waits to access a data object
in JA. Fourth, all the data objects in JA are downloaded.
Fifth, it waits to access a data object in PA. Finally, all the
data objects in PA are downloaded. According to the above
steps, the average access time ATj for accessing all the data
objects in query pattern j can be derived:
