Researchers in sensor networks have looked at various ways
of saving energy of sensors. In particular, [12, 8, 7] have
proposed exploiting redundancy in sensed readings of sen-
sors that are in close proximity. However, the approaches
proposed in [12] rely on sensors to gure out among them-
selves the redundant part in their sensed information and
suppress it from transmission.
We see three problems in this approach. Firstly, it will take
N transmissions for a group of N sensors to gure out all
the redundant information, which is costly and may out-
weigh the advantage of removing redundancy. Secondly, the
approach works well when the sensed readings are simple
(like temperature, pressure, etc.). In cases when the sensed
readings are complex (like image from a camera, assum-
ing a network of cameras [1]), it is not clear how one may
determine the redundant part given the limited computa-
tional power at the sensors. Thirdly, at the very best, this
approach only minimizes the redundancy in information be-
ing sent. It may work well in sensor networks like network
of temperature sensors where the sensed reading is not ex-
pected to vary much in a small spatial region. However, the
assumption of redundancy is not true in general. Consider
a network of motion sensors. Assume that the reading at
a sensor (for example, magnetometer sensor) is a function
of its distance from a moving object. In such a case, the
readings of sensors in close proximity will not be that same
but will be correlated. We distinguish between redundancy
and correlation. We say that readings at two sensors have
redundancy if there is a part that is common to both. For ex-
ample, if two temperature sensors in close proximity sense
65F as the temperature, we say that there is redundancy
in their information. Although the word \correlation" has
many connotations, for the purpose of this paper, we say
that the readings at two sensors are correlated if given the
reading of one sensor one may derive the reading at another

sensor with reasonable accuracy. In other words, whenever
the reading at one sensor is a function of the readings at
the other sensor we say that two sensors have correlated
readings. One may think of redundancy as a special case
of correlation where one may derive reading at a sensor by
employing an identity function (i.e., f(x) = x). Returning
back to our example of sensor network of motion sensors, if
the reading at a motion sensor is a deterministic function of
its distance from the closest moving object, then readings
at two sensors A and B are correlated (not redundant). The
reading at A may be derived given the reading at B, the lo-
cation of two sensors, and the location of the object. Lastly,
this approach only talk about eliminating redundancy in
readings sensed in the same time frame. In our proposed
scheme, we specify mechanisms for identifying correlation
in readings across time frames and try to eliminate the need
for transmitting these if they can be derived from older read-
ings. We expect this to translate into signicant savings in
energy.
In [8], authors deal with the problem of how to self-organize
sensors that are thrown together, so that a meaningful sens-
ing task can be accomplished. The paper prescribes com-
pressing information at the nodes acting as cluster-head, be-
fore sending to a central station. However, the paper does
not specify any mechanism for performing this compression
operation. Also, this approach does not prevent sensors from
sending redundant information.
In [11] the emphasis is on being able to \route" data sensed
at sensors to where the interest is. It does not deal with
cutting down the information being relayed.