5.3 Experimental Results
5.3.1 Evaluating the Performance of the Complete
Approach
Fig. 17 shows the effect of the number of data objects. The
average access time increases as the number of data objects
increases. The smaller the number of data objects is, the
better the performance of our approach is. For example,
when the number of data objects is 100 and 700, the ratio of
the average access time of our approach to the lower bound
on the average access time of the optimal broadcast
program is 2.13 and 2.30, respectively. In our approach,
the access graph is first constructed to represent the query
patterns, then the scheduling algorithm is applied on the
access graph to get the broadcast program. As the number
of data objects increases, the performance of the scheduling
algorithm degrades (the performance of the scheduling
algorithm will be separately discussed in Section 5.3.2).
Moreover, as the number of data objects increases, the
number of the data objects in the query patterns whose
access order should be determined by MIW also increases.
However, the ratio of the average access time of our
approach to the lower bound on the average access time of
the optimal broadcast program remains about the same. In
the simulation, the ratios are 2.13, 2.21, 2.26, 2.28, 2.29, 2.29,
and 2.30 when the number of data objects are 100, 200, 300,
400, 500, 600, and 700, respectively.
The effect of the data object sizes is shown in Fig. 18.
When  equals zero, the data object sizes are uniformly
distributed between [20, 80]. Moreover, as the value of 
increases, the probability of generating larger data objects
increases. Therefore, the larger the value of  is, the more
the number of data buckets in a broadcast cycle is needed,
i.e., which lengthens the average access time. The ratio of
the average access time of our approach to the lower bound
on the average access time of the optimal broadcast
program is invariant to the data object size distribution.
Fig. 19 shows the effect of the access frequency of query
patterns. As shown in the figure, the ratio of the average
access time of our approach to the lower bound on the
average access time of the optimal broadcast program is
invariant to the access frequency distribution. The effect of
the number of query patterns is shown in Fig. 20. As shown
in the result, when the number of query patterns is small,
say 100, the ratio of the average access time of our approach
to the lower bound on the average access time of the
optimal broadcast program is 2.54, which is not as good as
the performance shown in Fig. 18. The reason is that, when
the number of query patterns is small, the number of data
objects in the query patterns whose access order should be
determined by MIW increases.
Fig. 21 shows the effect of the number of data objects in a
query pattern. As shown in the result, in our approach, the
average access time increases as the number of data objects
in a query pattern increases. However, the lower bound on
the average access time of the optimal broadcast program
decreases as the number of data objects in a query pattern
increases. The reason is that, as the number of data objects
in a query pattern increases, the number of data objects in
SA (|SA|) increase. Therefore, eb 	 jSAjjT2=jSAjj decreases.
Referring to Section 5.1.2, the minimal value of
occurs when
According to the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, it means that
the direction of are the same.
That is,, which means that the data
objects in SA are uniformly allocated in the broadcast
program. However, when considering di
SAj , the minimal
value occurs when the data objects in SA are allocated
adjacently, i.e., kSAjk. These two conditions cannot be
satisfied at the same time. Moreover, as the number of data
objects in a query pattern increases, the time needed to
access all the data objects in a query pattern increases.
Therefore, in our approach, the average access time
increases as the number of data objects in a query pattern
increases.