Elastic burst detection is the problem of finding all windows wi
of arbitrary length jwij at time t, such that for a monotonic aggregation
function A the aggregate A(wi) exceeds a window specific
threshold f(wi). For convenience, we will refer to A(wi) using
A(ws
i ;we
i ), where ws
i is the first element contained in wi and we
i is
the last one. In the following section we describe the burst detection
approach proposed by Zhang and Shasha and our implementation
of their work.
In [13] Zhang and Shasha introduced the aggregation pyramid,
a triangular data structure over N stream elements having N levels.
N is the maximum window size over which a burst can be detected,
and in each level, the level index h corresponds to the length of the
analyzed sequence, i.e., the size of the regarding window. Level
0 has N cells containing the original data elements y1; : : : ; yN.
Level 1 has N  1 cells and stores aggregates over two-element
sets from the original data stream. The construction of the aggregation
pyramid is recursive: Level h has N  h cells, and each
cell c(h; t) contains the aggregates from a window of length h + 1
starting at element yt. The aggregate of cell c(h; t) is computed by
c(h; t) = A(c(h  1; t); c(0; t + h)). Consequently, level N  1
stores the aggregate over the complete sequence. Figure 1 shows
an aggregation pyramid over a window of size N = 6.
The aggregation pyramid has some interesting properties. For instance,
each of its cells c(h; t) spans to a sub pyramid. The window
starting at time t, which is composed of the following h + 1 cells
on level 0, is called the shadow of cell c(h; t). Now it is straightforward
to identify a burst. If a cell c(h; t) exceeds the threshold
for its shadow, a burst starting at time t is discovered.
In order to efficiently identify the exact length and time of the
burst, Zhang et. al additionally introduce a hierarchical tree structure
called shifted aggregation tree. The nodes of this tree are a
proper subset of the cells in the aggregation pyramid. There are at
least two nodes at each level of the tree, except for the root level.
The leaf nodes of the shifted aggregation tree correspond to the
nodes at level 0 of the aggregation pyramid. A node on level i of
the aggregation tree represents the aggregate of its child nodes on
levels  i  1. A three level aggregation tree is depicted in Figure
1 (shaded cells). Each node of the aggregation tree corresponds
to one node of the aggregation pyramid.
A central property of burst detection using aggregation trees is
that the aggregate of each subsequence of length l, with l  hi 
si + 1, is covered by the shadow of a node at level i. hi denotes
the size of the window at level i and si is the shift at level i. That
means, each window having size  hi  si is covered by at least
one node on level i, and consequently each burst occurring in a
window of length hi  si can be discovered.
For the detection of a burst within the aggregation tree it is sufficient
to check if the aggregate in a node of level i exceeds any
of the thresholds for window sizes between hi1  si1 + 2 and
hisi+1. If a burst is discovered, a detailed search on the shadow
of the node that exceeds the threshold is necessary.
Using the above method, we implemented a burst detection operator
as part of our DSMS StreamDB. For efficiency, we only store
the rightmost branch of the aggregation tree as a list. This is sufficient,
as the nodes of the aggregation tree contain the aggregates
for all possible subsequences of the sliding window over time as
the stream progresses and the sliding window moves. The N most
recent stream elements, which are contained in the current sliding
window, are maintained in a ring buffer. The height of the aggregation
tree is N=minSize, where N is the maximum window size
and minSize is the minimum length of a burst that can be detected.