In the following we describe the general burst detection algorithm
(Algorithm 1) that uses the exponential smoothing. Although
there exist three separated operators, for clarity we present only
one all-encompassing algorithm. As presented here, the algorithm
works for both, single and double exponential smoothing. Thus, it
is capable of handling linear trends. Which method is actually used
is controlled by the input variables. For static double smoothing we
use smoothcont = false. Like this, we determine the smoothing
values S and b only once in the beginning using the first cnt elements
of the stream. Dynamic exponential smoothing refers to
a re-computation of the smoothing values based on jumping windows.
Thus, only in this case we set smoothcont = true and
dynamic = true. Single exponential smoothing is always computed
incrementally in each time step (assured by setting cnt = 1
and smoothcont = true) and can by static (dynamic = false)
or dynamic (dynamic = true).
We start with an initial learning phase in order to get first parameters
S and b from the exponential smoothing (implemented
in method expsmoothing – if single smoothing is used, b can be
an arbitrary value, because it is not used later on). The size cnt
of the window used for this should depend on the input data and
the actual application scenario. How to determine an appropriate
value for cnt is one of the open issues we currently investigate.
In parallel, we build the aggregation tree (included in method
burstdetection). After the initial learning, we can start burst detection.
This is also done by the method burstdetection, which
runs the detection algorithm from [13].
The important point is the computation of the current threshold
f. For this, we use the parameters from the exponential smoothing
in order to predict the value  expected for the current stream
element yt. The standard deviation 2 used for computing f is
determined from the N elements in the regarded time window.
If we use dynamic smoothing the threshold computation is based
on only short-term predictions, which can help to identify changes
in the stream. Currently, we use a fixed interval of cnt elements.
We are investigating if this should be replaced by a more dynamic
and flexible approach. Integrating triple exponential smoothing is
straight forward and omitted here.