Peer-to-peer (P2P) architecture and technologies have received
considerable attention as an efficient way for providing
large-scale distributed storage and information retrieval. P2P
systems consist of Internet hosts that act as peers and form
an overlay network. Significant amount of research has been
directed towards designing structured P2P systems [20], [22],
[26], [18], [14]. Many of these implement distributed hash
tables (DHTs), which are highly scalable and offer efficient,
low latency lookups (i.e., search and retrieval of data). However,
some applications such as naming services require lower
latencies than can be offered by these DHTs [6]. In this paper,
we focus on the problem of improving the lookup performance
of such structured P2P systems.
Every node in a P2P system1 is responsible for a certain
set of items and the system has an appropriate protocol for
efficient routing of queries for items. The design objective is
to have every node store pointers to certain other nodes in the
system such that a query for an item reaches the destination
node (i.e., the node with the queried item) in as few hops
as possible. There is an inherent trade-off between the worstcase
number of hops required by a query, and the number of
neighbor pointers maintained by a node [23].
There are two key components in the design of P2P systems:
the design of the routing protocol and the choice of neighbors.
In two popular DHTs, Pastry [20] and Chord [22], each node
stores O(log n) neighbors in its routing table, where n is the
number of nodes. These neighbors are chosen intelligently
to ensure that queries take O(log n) hops in the worst case.
However, the average query latency (in terms of hops) can
be markedly different depending on the popularity distribution
of nodes. In this work, we present efficient, scalable
algorithms to minimize average query latency by caching
additional neighbors based on frequencies of node accesses.
Intuitively, the existing neighbors based on the underlying P2P
system (henceforth, referred to as core neighbors) attempt to
minimize the worst-case query latency, while the additional
neighbors selected by our algorithms try to reduce the average
query latency by accounting for the non-uniformity of
query popularities. We refer to these additional neighbors as
auxiliary neighbors since they supplement the core neighbors
for accelerating query lookups.
The number of neighbors maintained by each node is
directly related to the maintenance cost induced by peers
joining and leaving the system. In this paper, we provide
algorithms that take the size of the routing table as input,
and provide the appropriately-sized set of optimal auxiliary
neighbors. The size of the routing table is a design choice, and
needs to be traded off with the cost of maintaining the routing
table. The maintenance cost consists of the overhead messages
for ensuring that all the entries point to live neighbors in the
presence of churn. This cost might be incurred when a node
leaves (maybe, after making an announcement), or when nodes
refresh their neighbor list. For instance, at regular intervals, a
P2P node may send ping messages to check the liveness of its
neighbors; the neighbors found dead after pinging are replaced
by new neighbors. If the churn is high, then the refresh interval
needs to be smaller to ensure that stale neighbors in the
routing table do not result in unanswered queries. Clearly, the
maintenance cost of the routing table grows with the size of the
routing table (refer to [13] for an excellent evaluation of how
the maintenance cost varies with different system parameters).
To keep the maintenance cost roughly of the same order
as before, it is reasonable to keep the number of auxiliary
neighbors around the same as the number of core neighbors.
In [12], the authors propose a protocol that adjusts the size
of the routing table based on a given bandwidth budget for
maintenance. Our approach can be used to populate the routing
table entries on top of such an approach.
It is important to recognize that there are several different
ways to improve lookup performance in P2P systems,
including replication and caching of items. In item caching, a
node caches items that have been queried previously, and in
a replication-based approach, the popular items are replicated
at several nodes. [16] presents a replication scheme that can
achieve O(1) hops in lookup performance, assuming a zipfian
distribution for item popularities. However, item caching and
replication schemes have some inherent drawbacks, especially,
in scenarios where the items are large or the items are updated
frequently and peer churn is relatively low. Clearly, if items
are large and storage at nodes is limited, then storage will
be a bottleneck. Moreover, large items imply high replication
costs. Further, even if items are small, if they are updated
frequently, then item caching will result in a large number of
stale copies, and replication will incur a large cost due to the
necessary updates. One example of such a scenario would be a
P2P implementation [6], [17], [4], [15] of the Domain Name
System (DNS) with support for mobile IP. In this example
system, IP addresses of domain names may change frequently
but the DNS servers (which are the peers in this case) can
be expected to be reasonably stable. An approach based on
caching additional neighbor pointers does not suffer from the
above-mentioned problems even in the face of frequent item
updates or large items. Another drawback with item caching
and replication is that such approaches exclusively benefit the
queries to the particular items that are cached or replicated.
On the other hand, caching a pointer to a peer not only
benefits queries to items in the cached peer, but also queries to
items in other peers that can be reached faster via the cached
peer. Nevertheless, our approach does not preclude the use of
replication and item caching and can be used in conjunction
with such schemes for added benefit.
As hinted above, one of the motivations for improving query
lookup times in P2P systems comes from the proposed use
of P2P architectures for implementing DNS [6], [17], [4],
[15]. In [15], the authors compare hierarchical and DHT-based
naming services, and note that an ideal naming service needs
to combine features of both: though P2P systems are more resilient
to attacks, they suffer from poor query response times as
compared to hierarchical DNS. Our work is motivated by the
fact that today’s DNS servers obtain enormous performance
gains by caching IP addresses of other DNS servers [10]. We
leverage this idea to accelerate query lookups in P2P systems
as well. Interestingly, the dynamic nature and the structure
of P2P systems not only pose some unique challenges (quite
different from hierarchical DNS implementations), but also
provide scope for designing intelligent algorithms that exploit
the underlying structure and routing policy.
In this paper, we focus primarily on Pastry [20] and
Chord [22]. However, the basic technique is also applicable to
other P2P systems that employ similar routing policies. More
precisely, the techniques presented for Pastry can be directly
applied to Tapestry [26] and PGrid [1], and the techniques for
Chord are applicable to SkipGraphs [2].
There are three main contributions of this paper.
1) We propose a novel technique for optimizing average
lookup times in Pastry and Chord by caching additional
neighbor pointers based on the access frequencies of
peers. Our algorithms are efficient and scale well with
the number of nodes in the system. Any node S wishing
to choose the optimal set of k auxiliary neighbors can
compute the desired pointers in O(nk) time in Pastry
and O(nk log n) time in Chord, where n is the number
of distinct nodes for which S has seen queries. We
also provide an incremental version of our algorithm
for Pastry that runs in O(k) time and can be used to
efficiently maintain the optimal set of neighbors as peer
popularities change and peers join or leave the system.
2) We also extend our algorithms to support multiple
QoS classes by handling queries that require guaranteed
worst-case lookup times.
3) We present extensive simulation results, which clearly
demonstrate that our schemes provide substantial improvements
in the query lookup times as compared
to an approach that does not account for the access
frequencies in choosing the auxiliary neighbors. For
example, with log n auxiliary neighbors in Chord, the
improvement is up to 57% when the item popularities are
zipfian with parameter 1:2. In other words, our algorithm
for Chord results in response times less than half of
what is achieved without taking access frequencies into
account.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we provide a quick overview of Chord and Pastry, and also
discuss other related work. In Section III, we formally define
the problem addressed in this paper. In Sections IV and V,
we present optimal algorithms for auxiliary neighbor selection
in Pastry and Chord, respectively. We present the simulatio
results in Section VI. Finally, we conclude in Section VII.