5.3.2 Evaluating the Performance of the Scheduling
Algorithm
Fig. 22 shows the effect of the number of data objects.
The average access time increases as the number of data
objects increases. Moreover, as the number of data objects
increases, our approach outperforms PartiallyLinearOrder.
The reason is that, in our approach, the optimal linear
ordering algorithm is first used to determine the major
order of the data objects. After determining the major
order of the data objects, the information kept in REintra is
used to adjust the order to get a better average access
time. Therefore, our approach has a global view of the
relationship among data objects. Moreover, when the
number of data objects is 700, the ratio of the average
access time of our approach to the lower bound on the
average access time of the optimal broadcast program is
36; 798=28; 341 ffi 1:3, which is a good approximation for
solving the scheduling problem.
The effect of the data object sizes is shown in Fig. 23. Our
approach outperforms PartiallyLinearOrder, especially
when the value of  is small. The reason is that
PartiallyLinearOrder does not take the size of data objects
into account. When  equals zero, the data object sizes are
uniformly distributed between [20, 80]. Moreover, as the
value of  increases, the probability of generating larger
data objects increases. Therefore, the smaller the value of 
is, the more random the data size distribution is. Partially
LinearOrder is not suitable to deal with the variation in data
object sizes.
Fig. 24 shows the effect of the ratio of out-degrees. The
average access time increases as the number of out-degrees
increases. Moreover, as the number of out-degrees increases,
our approach outperforms PartiallyLinearOrder.
The reason is that, as the number of out-degrees increases,
the complexity of the access graph increases. To schedule a
complex access graph, an algorithm with a global view will
perform better. As mentioned in the previous discussion,
our approach has a global view of the relationship among
data objects. Therefore, our approach outperforms Partially
LinearOrder. Moreover, when the ratio of out-degrees is
6:1:1:1 or 1:6:1:1, the value of the average access time of our
approach over the lower bound on the average access time
of optimal broadcast program is 1.2, which approximates
the optimal broadcast program very well. The reason is that,
when the access graph is simpler, the number of edges
removed by applying the maximum branching algorithm is
reduced.