In this paper, we have proposed ACQUIRE - a novel mechanism for data extraction in energyconstrained
sensor networks. The key feature of ACQUIRE is the injection of active queries
into the network with triggered local updates. We first categorized sensor network query
types and identified those for which ACQUIRE is likely to perform in an energy-efficient
manner: complex, one-shot, non-aggregate queries for replicated data.
We have developed a fairly sophisticated mathematical model that allows us to analytically
evaluate and characterize the performance (in terms of energy costs and response latency)
of ACQUIRE, as well as alternative techniques such as flooding-based queries (FBQ) and
expanding ring search (ERS). As far as we are aware, there are very few similar results in the
literature that provide similar mathematical characterizations of the performance of query
techniques for sensor networks. We validated our analysis through extensive simulations and
also identified ways in which the models can be extended and improved.
In our analysis we defined an amortization factor c to meaningfully capture the relationship
between the query rate and data dynamics. When c is low, more queries can be processed
in the time that a given datum remains “fresh.” Our analysis revealed that this parameter
has a significant impact on the energy costs of cached update schemes such as the one used
in ACQUIRE. Indeed, we showed that the optimal look-ahead in ACQUIRE depends solely
upon c, not on other parameters such as the size of the network or the size of the queries.
We found that ACQUIRE with optimal parameter settings outperforms the other schemes for
complex, one-shot queries in terms of energy consumption. Specifically, optimal ACQUIRE
performs many orders of magnitude better than flooding-based schemes (such as Directed
Diffusion) for such queries in large networks. We also observed that optimal ACQUIRE
can reduce the energy consumption by more than 60 ? 75% as compared to expanding ring
search (in highly dynamic environments and high query rates). The energy savings are
highest when c is high and NlnM is high. However, this energy savings come at the cost of
increased average latency in answering a query.
To conclude, we believe that there is no one-size-fits-all answer to the question: “How do we
efficiently query sensor networks?” We propose ACQUIRE as a highly scalable technique,
energy-efficient at solving complex one-shot queries for replicated data. We argue that
ACQUIRE deserves to be incorporated into a portfolio of query mechanisms for use in realworld
sensor networks.