Bonnet, Gehrke, and Seshadri [10, 11] as well as Yao and Gehrke [16] present the COUGAR
approach which treats sensor networks as distributed databases, with users tasking the network
with declarative queries which are then converted by a front-end query processor into
an efficient query plan for in-network processing. Similarly Govindan, Hellerstein, Hong et
al. also argue in [9] that sensor networks ought to be viewed primarily as virtual databases,
with query optimization performed via data-centric routing mechanisms within the network.
The efficient in-network computation of aggregate responses to queries is the subject of the
paper by Madden, Szewcyk et al. [19]. The ACQUIRE mechanism we describe in this paper
is compatible with this database perspective, and can viewed as a data-centric routing
mechanism that provides superior query optimization for responding to particular kinds of
queries: complex, one-shot queries for duplicated data.
Intanagonwiwat, Govindan, Estrin and Heidemann propose and study Directed Diffusion [5,
6], a data-centric protocol that is particularly useful for responding to long-standing/continuous
queries. In Directed Diffusion, an interest for named data is first distributed through the network
via flooding (although optimizations are possible for geographically localized queries),
and the sources with relevant data respond with the appropriate information stream. The
impact of aggregation in improving the energy costs of such data-centric protocols is examined
by Krishnamachari, Estrin and Wicker in [7].
Also related to our work are the Information Driven Sensor Querying (IDSQ) and Constrained
Anisotropic Diffusion Routing (CADR) mechanisms proposed by Chu, Hausseker
and Zhao [14]. In IDSQ, the sensors are selectively queried about correlated information
based on a criterion that combines information gain and communication cost, while CADR
routes a query to its optimal destination by following an information gain gradient through
the sensor network.
One technique that is close in spirit to ACQUIRE is the rumor-routing mechanism proposed
recently by Braginsky and Estrin in [21]. Their approach is quite interesting - sources
with events launch mobile agents which execute random walks in the network resulting
in event-paths. The queries issued by the querier/sink, in a manner somewhat similar to
ACQUIRE, are also mobile agents that follow random walks. Whenever a query agent
intersects with an event-path, it uses that information to efficiently route itself to the location
of the event. Rumor routing is a mechanism to lower the interest-flooding cost for Directed
Diffusion in situations where geographical information may not be available. Rumor routing
is not, however, geared primarily towards complex one-shot queries for replicated data (as
ACQUIRE is) and does not incorporate any look-ahead/update parameters. Moreover, if
data is replicated, there might be multiple sources, each of which might initiate a random
walk in the rumour-routing case. In such cases, rumour-routing may not be energy-efficient.
Other data-centric routing protocols proposed for sensor networks include SPIN for data
dissemination by Heinzelman, Kulik and Balakrishnan [17], and LEACH for data collection
by Heinzelman, Chandrakasan and Balakrishnan [18].
The recent work by Ratnasamy, Karp et al. [13] presents the geographic hash table technique
for data-centric storage (DCS) in sensor networks. This approach is particularly useful for
storing information to deal with historic queries (i.e. queries for non-current data). In
estimating the cost of local storage the authors of [13] assume the use of flooding-based
queries, to which we provide an alternative in this paper. It is also be possible to conceive
of using our ACQUIRE scheme in conjunction with any DCS techniques that result in
replication (e.g. for robustness reasons).
Our work also has some similarities to techniques proposed for searching in unstructured
peer-to-peer (P2P) overlay networks on the Internet. In particular, [22] discusses the possibility
of launching k-random walks through the unstructured P2P network for discovering
required files/data. This differs from our work in three respects: one is that the cost-model
is different in the two scenarios - in P2P networks one is primarily concerned with minimizing
bandwidth usage and delay while we are primarily concerned with minimizing energy
consumption; the second is that we incorporate the look-ahead parameter and allow for
complex queries, which, as we show in this paper, significantly improves the performance of
such a search; and finally, the trajectories followed by active queries in ACQUIRE need not
necessarily be random walks, they could be directed and deterministically selected.
Our ACQUIRE mechanism combines a trajectory for active queries with a localized update
mechanism whereby each node on the path utilizes information about all the nodes within
a look-ahead of d hops. The size of this look-ahead parameter effects a tradeoff between the
information obtained (which helps reduce the length of the overall trajectory) and the cost for
obtaining the information. This look-ahead region is somewhat similar in spirit to the notion
of zones in the Zone Routing Protocol (ZRP) [15] and to the notion of neighborhoods in the
Contact-based Architecture for Resource Discovery (CARD) [12] developed for mobile ad-hoc
networks. One key difference is that in ACQUIRE, only nodes on the active query trajectory
need to have this look-ahead information and the neighborhood updates are triggered ondemand,
if current information happens to be obsolete.
While the trajectory for the active queries is assumed to be random in our modelling in
this paper, it is possible to envision pre-determined trajectories as well. One interesting
new mechanism that we could combine ACQUIRE with is the idea of routing along curves,
described by Nath and Niculescu in [20].