Partly for ease of analysis, we have described and modelled a very basic version of the
ACQUIRE mechanism in this paper. One of our major next steps is to convert ACQUIRE
into a functional protocol that can be validated on an experimental sensor network testbed.
There are a number of ways in which our analysis can be improved, and a number of
additional design issues need to be considered in our future work, some of which we outline
here.
Our analytical model of ACQUIRE assumes that the query packet is always of a fixed size
consisting of all the individual sub-queries and their responses. The entire packet circulates
in the network till the answer to the last query is obtained. The packet is then sent back to
the querier. This simplifies the analysis as we need to only count the number of transmissions
in order to quantify Eavg. However, it may be more efficient to send the answers to subqueries
to the querier node as and when they are obtained. Our analysis could be tightened
to take this into consideration.
The efficiency of ACQUIRE can also be improved if the neighborhoods of the successive
active nodes in the query trajectory have minimal overlap. This may potentially be best
accomplished by using some deterministic trajectory as opposed to random walks, possibly
making use of additional topological or geographical information. These would also aid in
minimizing inefficiency due to the walk revisiting nodes (looping). Guided trajectories may
also be helpful in dealing with non-uniform data distributions, ensuring that active queries
spend most time in regions of the network where the relevant data are likely to be. In
the analysis, we ignored the issue of overlap (although this was taken into account in the
simulations we presented).
One interesting result of our analysis is that the performance of ACQUIRE and the optimal
choice of the look-ahead parameter d are functions of the amortization factor c and (somewhat
surprisingly) independent of M, N, and the total number of nodes X. This lends itself
to the possibility of using distributed algorithms in which localized estimates of c are used to
determine the value of d at each step without global knowledge of system parameters. This
would significantly improve the scalability of ACQUIRE.
As presented here, ACQUIRE is meant to be used in situations where there is replicated
data. At the very least there should be one node in the network that can resolve each
component sub-query. One way to deal with other situations might be to equip the active
queries with a time-to-live (TTL) field which is decremented at each hop. This would permit
ACQUIRE to gracefully terminate with a negative response if a solution is not found within
a reasonable period of time, to be followed up (for example) by a flooding-based query.
Our analysis has assumed a regular grid topology. This helped us in gaining considerable
insight into the performance of ACQUIRE, ERS and FBQ. In reality the topology of a
sensor network might not only be irregular but also dynamic, due to failures and mobility.
Exploring the behavior of ACQUIRE on such topologies is a focus of our ongoing effort. We
should mention, however, that our results do already have some generality in this regard: so
long as a reasonable model for f(d) can be developed for the network topology, the analysis
presented here can be extended in a straightforward manner.
In our modelling we have only counted the number of transmissions for energy costs, although
it is true that receptions can also influence energy consumption. This is the case especially
for broadcast messages, where there’s no channel reservation and all the direct neighbors
receive the message. We believe that some of the alternatives to active querying, such
as FBQ and ERS will in fact incur even more energy consumption under an energy model
that incorporates receptions because all their query messages are broadcast. Moreover, these
broadcasts would also lead to an increased latency in FBQ and ERS due to higher contention.
We would like to examine such richer energy cost models in the future.
In our analysis of delay, we looked only at response latency at the network layer (by examining
the number of maximum sequential transmissions required). These results must be taken
with a grain of salt, because they do take into account MAC-layer delay. For broadcast-based
querying techniques such as FBQ and ERS, there could be far greater MAC layer contention
than in ACQUIRE. This deserves worth further investigation.
We have also ignored the possibility of aggregate queries in this paper. Our assumption has
been that each sub-query is independent. This would be another direction for future work.