While sensor networks are going to be deployed in diverse application specific contexts,
one unifying view is to treat them essentially as distributed databases. The
simplest mechanism to obtain information from this kind of a database is to flood
queries for named data within the network and obtain the relevant responses from
sources. However, if the queries are a) complex, b) one-shot, and c) for replicated
data, this simple approach can be highly inefficient. In the context of energy-starved
sensor networks, alternative strategies need to be examined for such queries.
We propose a novel and efficient mechanism for obtaining information in sensor
networks which we refer to as ACQUIRE. The basic principle behind ACQUIRE is to
consider the query as an active entity that is forwarded through the network (either
randomly or in some directed manner) in search of the solution. ACQUIRE also
incorporates a look-ahead parameter d in the following manner: intermediate nodes
that handle the active query use information from all nodes within d hops in order
to partially resolve the query. When the active query is fully resolved, a completed
response is sent directly back to the querying node.
We take a mathematical modelling approach in this paper to calculate the energy
costs associated with ACQUIRE. The models permit us to characterize analytically
the impact of critical parameters, and compare the performance of ACQUIRE with
respect to other schemes such as flooding-based querying (FBQ) and expanding ring
search (ERS), in terms of energy usage, response latency and storage requirements.
We show that with optimal parameter settings, depending on the update frequency,
ACQUIRE obtains order of magnitude reduction over FBQ and potentially 60 to 85%
energy reduction over ERS (in highly dynamic environments and high query rates). We
show that these energy savings are provided in trade for increased response latency.
The mathematical analysis is validated through extensive simulations.
2