Joining an AlvisP2P network is as simple as downloading
and installing the peer client software. The user only has
to specify few communication parameters, such as the IP
address of a contact peer and the communication port.
The user can choose to enable a Web interface mode,
which starts a Web server that can be accessed by anyone
through a Web browser to query the AlvisP2P network, as
shown in Figure 4. Otherwise, the default standalone client
software is used, which allows only the local user to access
the AlvisP2P network from this peer.
The Swing interface of the AlvisP2P client is shown in
Figure 5. Once connected to the P2P network, the peer
client software can be used to submit queries and browse
the results. Figure 5 shows the client's \Search" tab with
a query result. For each document in the result, the fol-
lowing features are displayed: the URL of the hosting peer,
the document title, a snippet and a relevance score. Addi-
tionally, the client software provides a shared ¯le manager
within which speci¯c document access right can be de¯ned.
Document access. To make documents searchable by
other peers in the network, the user simply puts them in
the shared directory of his/her peer and uses the AlvisP2P
software to index them. A \Drag & Drop" function is also
supported for this task. The corresponding \Manager of
shared documents" tab is displayed in Figure 6.
Once a document is indexed, it becomes available at the
URL: http://PeerIP:Port/SharedDir/DocumentName.
The following document types are supported: text, xml,
html, doc, pdf, word or xml-based Alvis format. The index
of local shared document collection is implemented using the
Terrier search engine3.
External documents can be also integrated in the local
document collection. To do so, the user simply needs to
create an XML ¯le description (following the Alvis format)
containing the original URL of the document and some tex-
tual description of its content. The same procedure can also
be used to publish multimedia ¯les (video, audio).
As local documents always remain at the peer that holds
them, the document owner can de¯ne speci¯c access rights
for them. For example, the user can choose that a document
can be freely accessible or has a limited access controlled by
a username and a password.
Heterogeneity support. As the software provides an
interface to associate an Alvis peer with a local search en-
gine, our framework can support heterogenous indexing mod-
els at diRerent peers and ease their integration. The notion
of Alvis document digest is used for this. A document digest
is an explicit XML-based representation of the index of a
document collection. It contains the list of the document
URLs and, for each document, the list of its indexing terms,
along with their positions in the document. Thus, a possibly
sophisticated search engine (e.g., the one used by a digital
library) can convert its local index into the Alvis digest for-
mat, and transmit it to the peer it is associated with. The
peer then re-generates the local index in Terrier format and
starts the distributed indexing process, which will make the
document collection available for the whole P2P network.
Subsequently, if a user submits a query that retrieves one
of the documents that have been published by an external
search engine, he/she can click on the URL of the corre-
sponding peer. The query is then automatically forwarded
to the local search engine, which can generate an answer
by the means of its local retrieval functionalities and send
it back to the querying peer using the available API. This
mechanism was successfully implemented in a peer-to-peer
Service for Fedora [5].