We simulated the algorithm described in Section IV-A on
networks of sensors distributed uniformly with various spatial
densities. In all cases, we assumed that 1 unit of energy spent in
communicating 1 unit of data. We use the algorithm to generate
a clustering hierarchy with different number of levels in it to
see how the energy spent in the network reduces with the
increase in number of levels of clusters. In these simulations,
we have used the numerically computed set of optimal
probabilities (that minimizes E[C] given by (20)) of becoming
clusterheads at each level in the clustering hierarchy. Fig. 4.
and Fig. 5 show how the energy consumption decreases as the
number of levels in the hierarchy increases.
In Fig. 4, we observe that the energy savings are higher for
networks of sensors with lower communication radius. These
results can be explained as follows. In networks of sensors with
higher communication radius, the distance between a sensor
and the processing center in terms of number of hops is smaller
than the distance in networks of sensors with lower
communication radius and hence there is lesser scope of energy
savings. The energy savings with increase in the number of
levels in the hierarchy are also observed to be more significant
for lower density networks. This can be attributed to the fact
that among networks of same number of sensors, the networks
with lower density has the sensors distributed over a larger
area. Hence, in a lower density network, the average distance
between a sensor and the processing center is larger as
compared to the distance in a higher density network. This
means that there is more scope of reducing the distance
traveled by the data from any sensor in a non-clustered
network, thereby reducing the overall energy consumption.
Since data from each sensor has to travel at least one hop,
the minimum possible energy consumption in a network with
n sensors is n , assuming each sensor transmits 1 unit of data
and the cost of doing so is 1 unit of energy. From Fig. 4 and
Fig. 5, it is apparent that the energy consumption is very close
to this value when the number of levels in the hierarchy is 5,
irrespective of the density of sensors and their communication
radius. Hence, if one chooses to store the numerically
computed values of optimal probability in the sensor memory,
only a small amount of memory would be needed.