In the preliminary experimental study, we try to simulate
a real sensor network application scenario. The
experimental topology consists of a connected random
graph on a 50  50 two-dimensional space. 120 sensor
nodes are placed uniformly randomly on the space.
We choose a radio coverage limit for all sensor nodes so
that all neighbors within the range can be connected by
an edge. This range is chosen so that the network is connected
and the edges are not too dense. We then select
36 nodes from three corner areas as the relevant nodes
for a sample query. Choosing this topology over a gridbased
topology enables us capture the randomness of sensor
placement which is often governed by factors other
than geographic information. Cluster-heads in the three
groups are chosen by using a modified version of smallsize
weakly-connected dominating set algorithm (see [4])
so that the total distance to the heads in each group is
minimal. The lengths (number of hops in shortest path)
of the edges within a cluster vary between 1 and 3. Distances
from the selected cluster-heads to the AP are 6, 14,
and 9 hops.
Note that this type of randomly generated network is
a conservative choice for testing A3 protocol. When a
network exhibits certain patterns, such as dense implementation
in some areas, cluster structure will allow the
A3 protocol to perform more efficiently. An immediate
observation after having an AT is that precise data aggregation
using AT is much cheaper than a direct end-to-end
approach for each round (399 vs 81 message-hops) .
Sensor Data: In the experiments, we simulate monitoring
of a set of sensors that measure some physical
world values (e.g. radiation level) that increase linearly.
We model the sensor measurements as uniformly distributed
random values within interval [].
v is the ideal value for time instance obtained from a linear
function. We initialize; 10g for each source
sensor and  = 1:2 in our experimental setup, these factors
are further manipulated in specific experiments.