As computation-enabled devices shrink in scale and
proliferate in quantity, a relatively recent research di-
rection has emerged to contemplate future applications
of these devices and services to support them. A canon-
ical example of such a device is a sensor mote, a de-
vice with measurement, communication, and computa-
tion capabilities, powered by a small battery [12]. In-
dividually, these motes have limited capabilities, but
when a large number of them are networked together
into a sensor network, they become much more capa-
ble. Indeed, large-scale sensor networks are now being
applied experimentally in a wide variety of areas |
some sample applications include environmental mon-
itoring, surveillance, and traAc monitoring.
In a typical sensor network, each sensor produces
a stream of sensory observations across one or more
sensing modalities. But for many applications and sens-
ing modalities, such as reporting temperature readings,
it is unnecessary for each sensor to report its entire
data stream in full delity. Moreover, in a resource-
constrained sensor network environment, each message
transmission is a signicant, energy-expending oper-
ation. For this reason, and because individual read-
ings may be noisy or unavailable, it is natural to
use data aggregation to summarize information col-
lected by sensors. As a reection of this, a database
approach to managing data collected on sensor net-
works has been advocated [15, 20], with particular at-
tention paid to eAcient query processing for aggregate
queries [15, 20, 23].
In the TAG system [15], users connect to the sen-
sor network using a workstation or base station directly
connected to a sensor designated as the sink. Aggregate
queries over the sensor data are formulated using a sim-
ple SQL-like language, then distributed across the net-
work. Aggregate results are sent back to the worksta-
tion over a spanning tree, with each sensor combining
its own data with results received from its children. If
there are no failures, this in-network aggregation tech-
nique is both eective and energy-eAcient for distribu-
tive and algebraic aggregates [11] such as MIN, MAX,
COUNT and AVG. However, as we will argue, this
technique is much less eective in sensor network sce-
narios with moderate node and link failure rates. Node
failure is inevitable when inexpensive, faulty compo-
nents are placed in a a variety of uncontrolled or even
hostile environments. Similarly, link failures and packet
losses are common across wireless channels because of
environmental interference, packet collisions, and low
signal-to-noise ratios [23].
When a spanning tree approach is used for aggre-
gate queries, as in TAG, a single failure results in an
entire subtree of values being lost. If this failure is close
to the sink, the change in the resulting aggregate can be
signicant. Retransmission-based approaches are ex-
pensive in this environment, so solutions based upon
multi-path routing were proposed in [15]. For aggre-
gates such as MIN and MAX which are monotonic and
exemplary, this provides a fault-tolerant solution. But
for duplicate-sensitive aggregates such as COUNT or
AVG, that give incorrect results when the same value
is counted multiple times, existing methods are not sat-
isfactory.
In this paper, we propose a robust and scalable
method for computing duplicate-sensitive aggregates
across faulty sensor networks. Guaranteeing exact so-
lutions in the face of losses is generally impractical, so
we instead consider approximate methods. These meth-
ods are robust against both link and node failures. Our
contributions can be summarized as follows:
 We extend well-known duplicate insensitive
sketches [7] to handle SUM aggregates. Through
analysis and experiments, we show that the new
sketches provide accurate approximations.
 We present a method to combine duplicate insen-
sitive sketches with multi-path routing techniques
to produce accurate approximations with low com-
munication and computation overhead.
 We provide an analysis of the expected perfor-
mance of previous methods as well as our method.
 Finally, we present an extensive experimental eval-
uation of our proposed system which we compare
with previous approaches.
Concurrent with our work, Nath and Gibbons [17]
independently studied the use of duplicate-insensitive
sketches for aggregation in sensor networks. Their work
focused more on the logical decoupling of routing and
aggregation, along with the necessary sketch properties
for correctness using multipath routing, namely having
an associative, commutative, and idempotent aggrega-
tion operation.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows.
Background material is covered in Section 2. Count-
ing sketches, along with theory and new generaliza-
tions, are discussed in Section 3. A robust aggrega-
tion framework using these sketches is then presented
in Section 4. We validate our methods experimentally
in Section 5 and conclude in Section 6.