Update Cost with Fixed Error Tolerances: We execute
the update protocol while fixing the error bounds
which are initially evenly distributed among clusters and
sensors. The aggregated result as seen at the AP is shown
in figure 5 in which it is compared to the real aggregate
that would result from precise data aggregation. We can
see that the value being observed is within the specified
error bound of the real result. An accuracy boost is observed
periodically due to the violation of lower error
bound, which is decided by the fact that the approximate
aggregate tends to be smaller than the real aggregate since
sensor values are generally increasing. Figure 6 shows
(after a warm-up period) the update costs for each round
with different error tolerances. We can see that the larger
the error tolerance is, the more the savings. In our data
setup, we achieve around 50% savings on communication
cost with an absolute error tolerance of 10 for each
sensor. We also observe that the cost in each round exhibits
a pattern, with a few low costs followed by a high
cost. This is due to the fact the protocol tends to cost less
for a couple of rounds when the error bounds on clusterheads
are not violated. But when the local adjustment of
default values can not catch up with the increase of the
aggregated sensor values, a long range communication
to the AP is activated, which in turn results in a peak in
communication cost.
In addition to linearly increasing data, we also studied
update cost for constant data with random noise. The
results (which are not shown due to space limit) confirm
our early observation that under random noise scenario,
noise values tend to cancel each other out and the cost of
updating is fairly low.
Performance of Error Tolerance Adjustment: We
simulate dynamic behavior in sensor values by setting
different intervals ( = 1:2; 1:8; 2:4) when choosing
measurements for sensors in the three clusters. This
cause measurements of some clusters to be very active
( = 2:4), and some to be less active ( = 1:2). We
first choose different rth and  values used in the error
adjustment. The resulting cost for each round is shown
in figure 7. Our cost evaluation is conservative since
we assume control packets, which usually are smaller,
are of the same size as data packets. Figure 8, 9, 10,
and 11 show the update frequencies and cluster error tolerances
of each cluster-head(the adjustment is activated
at round 100). Note that in the figures, the three fre-
frequency
() series correspond to the three clusters
().
As shown by the figures, the adjustment causes error
tolerances to deviate fromthe initial uniform setting, with
larger error bounds assigned to cluster with more active
measurement values. And as a result, the update frequencies
get closer to each other in the later rounds of aggregation.
When the error tolerance is non-zero, the overall
cost in each round as shown in figure 7 is significantly
reduced as compared with figure 6. We can also see the
effect of parameter values on the performance of error
adjustment. Figure 8 and 9 show that the frequencies are
adjusted faster with a smaller  value. Figures 10 and
11 show that smaller rth value causes error bound adjustment
to be more sensitive to fluctuations in data values.