Recent advances in wireless communications and
microelectro-mechanical systems have motivated the
development of extremely small, low-cost sensors that possess
sensing, signal processing and wireless communication
capabilities. These sensors can be deployed at a cost much
lower than traditional wired sensor systems. The Smart Dust
Project at University of California, Berkeley [14, 15, 16] and
WINS Project at UCLA [1, 17], are two of the research projects
attempting to build such low-cost and extremely small
(approximately 1 cubic millimeter) sensors. An ad-hoc wireless
network of large numbers of such inexpensive but less reliable
and accurate sensors can be used in a wide variety of
commercial and military applications. These include target
tracking, security, environmental monitoring, system control,
etc.
To keep the cost and size of these sensors small, they are
equipped with small batteries that can store at most 1 Joule
[12]. This puts significant constraints on the power available
for communications, thus limiting both the transmission range
and the data rate. A sensor in such a network can therefore
communicate directly only with other sensors that are within a
small distance. To enable communication between sensors not
within each other’s communication range, the sensors form a
multi-hop communication network.
Sensors in these multi-hop networks detect events and then
communicate the collected information to a central location
where parameters characterizing these events are estimated.
The cost of transmitting a bit is higher than a computation [1]
and hence it may be advantageous to organize the sensors into
clusters. In the clustered environment, the data gathered by the
sensors is communicated to the data processing center through
a hierarchy of clusterheads. The processing center determines
the final estimates of the parameters in question using the
information communicated by the clusterheads. The data
processing center can be a specialized device or just one of
these sensors itself. Since the sensors are now communicating
data over smaller distances in the clustered environment, the
energy spent in the network will be much lower than the energy
spent when every sensor communicates directly to the
information processing center.
Many clustering algorithms in various contexts have been
proposed [2-7, 23-28]. These algorithms are mostly heuristic in
nature and aim at generating the minimum number of clusters
such that any node in any cluster is at most d hops away from
the clusterhead. Most of these algorithms have a time
complexity of O(n) , where n is the total number of nodes.
Many of them also demand time synchronization among the
nodes, which makes them suitable only for networks with a
small number of sensors.
The Max-Min d-Cluster Algorithm [5] generates d-hop
clusters with a run-time of O(d) rounds. But this algorithm
does not ensure that the energy used in communicating
information to the information center is minimized. The
clustering algorithm proposed in [7] aims at maximizing the
network lifetime, but it assumes that each node is aware of the
whole network topology, which is usually impossible for
wireless sensor networks which have a large number of nodes.
Many of these clustering algorithms [23, 26, 27, 28] are
specifically designed with an objective of generating stable
clusters in environments with mobile nodes. But in a typical
wireless sensor network, the sensors’ locations are fixed and
the instability of clusters due to mobility of sensors is not an
issue.
For wireless sensor networks with a large number of
energy-constrained sensors, it is very important to design a fast
algorithm to organize sensors in clusters to minimize the
energy used to communicate information from all nodes to the
processing center. In this paper, we propose a fast, randomized,
distributed algorithm for organizing the sensors in a wireless
sensor network in a hierarchy of clusters with an objective of
minimizing the energy spent in communicating the information
to the information processing center. We have used results in
stochastic geometry to derive values of parameters for the
algorithm that minimize the energy spent in the network of
sensors.