We study the effectiveness of our adaptive indexing technique by
applying it to a data set [32] of real user queries and shared data
collected from the Gnutella file sharing network during the Spring
of 2007. We randomly selected 650,000 queries and 2,000 peers
from this data set, where each peer shares between 100 and 5,000
files. We use the terms in filenames to represent each file.
We simulate a DHT-based peer-to-peer network of 2,000 peers.
Query issuers are randomly picked among the peers. We assume
that the DHT-based infrastructure is stable: each peer joins the
network once, and stays connected until all queries are processed.
Thus, there is no cost of maintaining the network topology. Also,
there is no cost of re-transferring global posting lists due to peer
joining and leaving. Notice that, as we stated earlier in Section
3.2, we can tune the parameter Ne to represent the cost of joining
and leaving the network in our experiments. Whenever a peer
wants to retrieve a global posting list for a term t, or wants to send
its local posting list of t, it needs to locate the peer responsible for
t first by issuing a message to that peer. We do not include this
cost, which is in the order of O(logNP), in our model as it is the
same for all indexing techniques. For the same reason, we do not
include the cost of returning matching documents.
For each peer, we record the number of messages required for
sending all of its local posting lists to responsible peers (i.e., its
index-building cost), and the number of query messages received
(i.e., its query issuing cost). We also record, for each query, the
number of messages required to transfer all global posting lists of
its terms from the responsible peers to the client.
Our main metric is the total network cost to index the contents
and to process the query workload (posting list retrieval and query
issuing) in terms of the total number of messages transferred
among peers. We compare the cost of our adaptive indexing
technique with the costs of the peer-level indexing technique and
the document-level indexing technique. We also include the cost
of adaptive indexing technique using cosine() as the distance
function to reveal the impact of the choice of distance function.
The characteristics of queries and shared contents used in our
experiments are summarized in Table 1 and Table 2.
