To determine the optimal parameters for the algorithm
described above, we make the following assumptions:
a) The sensors in the wireless sensor network are
distributed as per a homogeneous spatial Poisson
process of intensity λ in 2-dimensional space.
b) All sensors transmit at the same power level and hence
have the same radio range r .
c) Data exchanged between two communicating sensors
not within each others’ radio range is forwarded by
other sensors.
d) A distance of d between any sensor and its
clusterhead is equivalent to ?d / r? hops.
e) Each sensor uses 1 unit of energy to transmit or receive
1 unit of data.
f) A routing infrastructure is in place; hence, when a
sensor communicates data to another sensor, only the
sensors on the routing path forward the data.
g) The communication environment is contention- and
error-free; hence, sensors do not have to retransmit any
data.
The basic idea of the derivation of the optimal parameter
values is to define a function for the energy used in the network
to communicate information to the information-processing
center and then find the values of parameters that would
minimize it.
1) Computation of the optimal probability of becoming a
clusterhead:
As per our assumptions, the sensors are distributed
according a homogeneous spatial Poisson process and hence,
the number of sensors in a square area of side 2a is a Poisson
random variable, N with mean λA , where A = 4a2 . Let us
assume that for a particular realization of the process there are
n sensors in this area. Also assume that the processing center
is at the center of the square. The probability of becoming a
clusterhead is p ; hence, on average, np sensors will become
clusterheads. Let Di be a random variable that denotes the
length of the segment from a sensor located at
(xi , yi ), i = 1,2,..., n to the processing center. Without loss of
generality, we assume that the processing center is located at
the center of the square area. Then,
Since there are on an average np CHs and the location of
any CH is independent of the locations of other CHs, the total
length of the segments from all these CHs to the processing
center is 0.765npa .
Now, since a sensor becomes a clusterhead with
probability p , the clusterheads and the non-clusterheads are
distributed as per independent homogeneous spatial Poisson
processes PP1 and PP0 of intensity λ1 = pλ and
λ0 = (1? p)λ respectively.
For now, let us assume that we are not limiting the
maximum number of hops in the clusters. Each non-clusterhead
joins the cluster of the closest clusterhead to form a
Voronoi tessellation [10]. The plane is thus divided into zones
called the Voronoi cells, each cell corresponding to a PP1
process point, called its nucleus. If Nv is the random variable
denoting the number of PP0 process points in each Voronoi
cell and Lv is the total length of all segments connecting the
PP0 process points to the nucleus in a Voronoi cell, then
according to results in [11],
Define C1 to be the total energy used by the sensors in a
Voronoi cell to communicate one unit of data to the
clusterhead. Then,
Define C2 to be the total energy spent by all the sensors
communicating 1 unit of data to their respective clusterheads.
Because, there are np cells, the expected value of C2
conditioned on N , is given by
If the total energy spent by the clusterheads to communicate
the aggregated information to the processing center is denoted
byC3 , then,
Define C to be the total energy spent in the system. Then,
Removing the conditioning on N yields:
E[C] is minimized by a value of p that is a solution of
The above equation has three roots, two of which are
imaginary. The second derivative of the above function is
positive for the only real root of (9) and hence it minimizes the
energy spent.
The only real root of (9) is given by
where c = 3.06a λ .
2) Computation of the maximum number of hops allowed
from a sensor to its clusterhead:
Till now we have not put any limit on the number of hops
( k ) allowed between a sensor and its clusterhead. Our main
reason for limiting k was to be able to fix a periodicity for the
clusterheads at which they should communicate to the
processing center. So, if we can find the maximum possible
distance (call it Rmax ) at which a PP0 process point can be
from its nucleus in a Voronoi cell, we can find the value of k
by assuming that a distance Rmax from the nucleus is
equivalent to Rmax / r hops. Setting k = Rmax / r will also
ensure that there will be very few forced clusterheads in the
network.
Since it is not possible to get a value of Rmax such that we
can say with certainty that any point of PP0 process will be at
the most Rmax distance away from its nucleus in the Voronoi
Tessellation, we take a probabilistic approach; we set Rmax to a
value such that the probability of any point of PP0 process
being more than Rmax distance away from all points of PP1
process is very small. Using this value of Rmax , we can get the
value of parameter k that would make the probability of any
sensor being more than k hops away from all volunteer
clusterheads very small.
Letρ M be the radius of the minimal ball centered at the
nucleus of a Voronoi cell, which contains the Voronoi cell. We
define pR to be the probability that ρ M is greater than a certain
value R , i.e. pR = P(ρ M > R) . Then, it can be proved
that 7 exp( 1.09 2 )
pR ? ? λ11R [11]. If Rα is the value of R
such that pR is less than α , then,
To ensure minimum energy consumption, we will use a
very small value for α , which implies that the probability of
all sensors being within k hops from at least one volunteer
clusterhead is very high.
For α = 0.001 and values of p and k computed according
to (10) and (12), for a network of 1000 sensors, on an average 1
sensor will not join any volunteer clusterheads and will become
a forced clusterhead. The optimal value of p for a network
with 1000 nodes in an area of 100 sq. units is 0.08, which
means 80 nodes will become volunteer clusterheads on an
average. Hence, for a network of 1000 nodes in an area of 100
sq. units, only 1.23 % of all clusterheads are forced
clusterheads.