Various issues in the design of wireless sensor networks ?
design of low-power signal processing architectures, lowpower
sensing interfaces, energy efficient wireless media
access control and routing protocols [3, 6, 20], low-power
security protocols and key management architectures [29-30],
localization systems [21, 22], etc. ? have been areas of
extensive research in recent years. Gupta and Kumar have
analyzed the capacity of wireless ad hoc networks [18] and
derived the critical power at which a node in a wireless ad hoc
network should communicate to form a connected network
with probability one [19].
Many clustering algorithms in various contexts have also
been proposed in the past [2-7, 23-28], but to our knowledge,
none of these algorithms aim at minimizing the energy spent in
the system. Most of these algorithms are heuristic in nature and
their aim is to generate the minimum number of clusters such
that a node in any cluster is at the most d hops away from the
clusterhead. In our context, generating the minimum number of
clusters might not ensure minimum energy usage.
In the Linked Cluster Algorithm [2], a node becomes the
clusterhead if it has the highest identity among all nodes within
one hop of itself or among all nodes within one hop of one of
its neighbors. This algorithm was improved by the LCA2
algorithm [8], which generates a smaller number of clusters.
The LCA2 algorithm elects as a clusterhead the node with the
lowest id among all nodes that are neither a clusterhead nor are
within 1-hop of the already chosen clusterheads. The algorithm
proposed in [9], chooses the node with highest degree among
its 1–hop neighbors as a clusterhead.
In [4], the authors propose a distributed algorithm that is
similar to the LCA2 algorithm. In [28], the authors propose two
load balancing heuristics for mobile ad hoc networks. The first
heuristic, when applied to a node-id based clustering algorithm
like LCA or LCA2, leads to longer, low-variance clusterhead
duration. The other heuristic is for degree-based clustering
algorithms. Degree-based algorithms, in conjunction with the
proposed load balancing heuristic, produce longer clusterhead
duration.
The Weighted Clustering Algorithm (WCA) elects a node
as a clusterhead based on the number of neighbors,
transmission power, battery-life and mobility rate of the node
[27]. The algorithm also restricts the number of nodes in a
cluster so that the performance of the MAC protocol is not
degraded.
The Distributed Clustering Algorithm (DCA) uses weights
associated with nodes to elect clusterheads [25]. These weights
are generic and can be defined based on the application. It
elects the node that has the highest weight among its 1-hop
neighbors as the clusterhead. The DCA algorithm is suitable for
networks in which nodes are static or moving at a very low
speed. The Distributed and Mobility-Adaptive Clustering
Algorithm (DMAC) modifies the DCA algorithm to allow node
mobility during or after the cluster set-up phase [26].
All of the above algorithms generate 1-hop clusters, require
synchronized clocks and have a complexity of O(n) . This
makes them suitable only for networks with a small number of
nodes.
The Max-Min d-cluster Algorithm proposed in [5]
generates d-hop clusters with a run-time of O(d) rounds. This
algorithm achieves better load balancing among the
clusterheads, generates fewer clusters [5] than the LCA and
LCA2 algorithms and does not need clock synchronization.
In [7], the authors have proposed a clustering algorithm that
aims at maximizing the lifetime of the network by determining
optimal cluster size and optimal assignment of nodes to
clusterheads. They assume that the number of clusterheads and
the location of the clusterheads are known a priori, which is not
possible in all scenarios. Moreover the algorithm requires each
node to know the complete topology of the network, which is
generally not possible in the context of large sensor networks.
McDonald et al. have proposed a distributed clustering
algorithm for mobile ad hoc networks that ensures that the
probability of mutual reachability between any two nodes in a
cluster is bounded over time [23].
Heinzelman et al. have proposed a distributed algorithm for
microsensor networks in which the sensors elect themselves as
clusterheads with some probability and broadcast their
decisions [6]. The remaining sensors join the cluster of the
clusterhead that requires minimum communication energy.
This algorithm allows only 1-hop clusters to be formed, which
might lead to a large number of clusters. They have provided
simulation results showing how the energy spent in the system
changes with the number of clusters formed and have observed
that, for a given density of nodes, there is a number of clusters
that minimizes the energy spent. But they have not discussed
how to compute this optimal number of clusterheads. The
algorithm is run periodically, and the probability of becoming a
clusterhead for each period is chosen to ensure that every node
becomes a clusterhead at least once within 1/ P rounds, where
P is the desired percentage of clusterheads. This ensures that
none of the sensors are overloaded because of the added
responsibility of being a clusterhead.
In [11], the authors have considered a 2-level hierarchical
telecommunication network in which the nodes at each level
are distributed according to two independent homogeneous
Poisson point processes and the nodes of one level are
connected to the closest node of the next higher level. They
have then studied the moments and tail of the distributions of
characteristics like the number of lower level nodes connected
to a particular higher level node and the total length of
segments connecting the lower level nodes to the higher level
node in the hierarchy. We use the results of this paper to obtain
the optimal parameters for our algorithm.
Baccelli and Zuyev have extended the above study to
hierarchical telecommunication networks with more than two
levels in [13]. They have considered a network of subscribers
at the lowest level connected to concentration points at the
highest level, directly or indirectly through distribution points.
The subscribers, distribution points and the concentrators form
the three levels in the hierarchy and are distributed according to
independent homogeneous Poisson processes. Assuming that a
node is connected to the closest node of the next higher level,
they have used point processes and stochastic geometry to
determine the average cost of connecting nodes in the network
as a function of the intensity of the Poisson processes
governing the distribution of nodes at various levels in the
network. They have then derived the intensity of the Poisson
process of distribution points (as a function of the intensities of
the Poisson processes of subscribers and concentration points)
that minimizes this cost function. They have also extended the
above results for non-purely hierarchical models and have
derived the optimal intensity of Poisson process of distribution
points numerically, given the intensities of other two processes.
They have then generalized the cost function for networks with
more than three levels.
The algorithm proposed in this paper is similar to the
clustering algorithm in [6]. In [6], the authors have assumed
that the sensors are equipped with the capability of tuning the
power at which they transmit and they communicate with
power enough to achieve acceptable signal-to-noise ratio at the
receiver. We, on the other hand, assume a network in which the
sensors are very simple and all the sensors transmit at a fixed
power level; data between two communicating sensors not
within each other’s radio range is forwarded by other sensors in
the network. The authors, in [6], have observed in their
simulation experiments that in a network with one level of
clustering, there is an optimal number of clusterheads that
minimizes the energy used in the network. In this paper, we
have used the results provided in [11] to obtain the optimal
number of clusterheads at each level of clustering analytically,
for a network clustered using our algorithm to generate one or
more levels of clustering.
