The sensor nodes in the networks we consider in this
paper have capabilities similar to Mica Motes [11] which
have a 4 MHz ATMEL processor, an embedded sensor,
an A/D converter, and a RFM TR1000 radio with
data rate at 40 kbits/second. The networks have a super
node, an access point (AP) with unlimited resources (in
terms of computation and communication) that interacts
freely with remote users in a wide area network(where
queries originate). All sensor nodes are scattered around
the access points to form a connected network. The network
topology is relatively stable. Communication between
sensors and between a sensor and the AP occurs
via multi-hop messaging. The sensor nodes are homogeneous
and generate single attribute data. They are also
clock-synchronized1 which allows each newly generated
data to be assigned a round number. A round is a processing
cycle for the network to collect all data generated
at a specific time instant. Sensor nodes may also have
other features such as location-awareness.
The data to be aggregated is generated at a pre-known
subset of sensor nodes, as specified in the query. Usually
they are distributed in the geographical regions where
the physical phenomena are being monitored. We assume
these nodes are grouped into a set of clusters using
cluster-oriented techniques such as those proposed in
[7, 15, 24]. The clustering process is implicitly designed
as part of routing algorithms. Data can be aggregated at
cluster-heads before the aggregated results are reported to
the access point. A cluster-head is physically represented
by a sensor node. On the other hand, a sensor node can
logically represent more than one cluster-head.
Sensor Data Representation: In this paper, we assume
that the values captured by sensors are numerical.
To support the notion of error tolerance, an approximation
of the numerical sensor values is represented in the
sensor database as an interval. Instead of using an upperand
lower-bound, we use the center value (v) and an error
tolerance  to represent the interval, which is
. Such a representation allows us to manipulate
and adapt the value and error tolerance of a sensor
node independently in our adaptive approximate aggregation
protocol (Section 3). The data is also time-stamped
with a logical value of time (a round number, in our case).
Cost Metrics: Due to the fact that communication is
the dominant cost factor as compared to sensing and computing
in normal data collection applications, we only
model the communication cost. Communication cost can
be measured in a number of ways - number of messages,
total network load etc. We specifically evaluate architectures
and protocols in terms of the number of messagehops
generated in the network. One message-hop is one
communication operation that transfers one packet of information
between two neighboring sensors in one hop.
Considering the fact that radio transmission ranges of
sensor nodes, which decide power consumption, are set
to be identical in common practice, the communication
cost is directly proportional to the number of messages
and the number of hops each message has to traverse. The
significant advantage of the total message hops metric is
that it indirectly covers other factors that can contribute to
communication overhead in a sensor network, such as energy
consumption for powering electronic sensor devices
and overhearing cost2. As is the case with aggregation
queries, we assume that all messages, including control
messages are of the same size; in other words, an aggregate
data packet will be of the same size as the data that
has been aggregated within it. This approach is conservative
since our protocol produces many control messages
and they are usually smaller than sensor data messages.