The energy required to communicate the data gathered by
the sensors to the information processing center through the
hierarchy of clusterheads will depend on the probabilities of
becoming a clusterhead at each level in the hierarchy and the
maximum number of hops allowed between a member of a
cluster and its clusterhead. In this section, we obtain optimal
values for the parameters of the algorithm described in Section
IV-A that would minimize this energy consumption.
To do so, we make the same assumptions as in Section IIIB.
Since we have assumed that the sensors are points of a
homogeneous Poisson process of intensity λ , the number of
sensors in a square area of side 2a is a Poisson random
variable (let’s call this N ) with meanλA , where A = 4a 2 is
the area of the square. Let us assume that for a particular
realization of the process, there are n sensors in this area. Let
us also define:
Ni : the number of members in a level-i cluster,
Li : the sum of distances between the members of a level-i
cluster and their level-i CH,
Hi : the number of hops from a member to its CH in a
typical level-i cluster,
TCHi : the total number of level-i CHs,
Ci : the total cost of communicating information from all
level-i CHs to the level-(i+1) CHs, and
C : the total cost of communicating information from the
sensors to the data processing center through the hierarchy of
clusterheads generated by the clustering algorithms.
In the proposed algorithm, the sensors elect themselves as
level-1 CH with probabilities p1 and the level-i CHs elect
themselves as level-(i+1) CHs with
probability pi+1 , i = 1,2,..., (h ?1) . Hence, by properties of the
Poisson process, level-i CHs, i = 1,2,..., h are governed by
homogeneous Poisson processes of intensities,
By arguments similar to those in Section III-B.1, the sum of
distance of level-(i-1) CHs from a level-i CH, i = 2,3,..., h in a
typical level-i cluster or the
The expected number of level-(i-1) CHs in a typical level-i
cluster is given by
Therefore, the expected number of hops between a level-(i-
1) CH and its level-i CH in a typical level-i cluster is given by
Hence, the expected total cost of communicating
information from all the level-(i-1) CHs to their respective
level-i CHs, i = 2,..., (h ?1), h is given by
The expected value of the total cost of communicating
information from all the sensors to their level-1 CHs is given
by
Hence, the expected total cost of communicating
information from sensors to the processing center in the
clustered environment is given by:
As apparent from Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, the function in (20) has
a very complex form with many local minima. Even if the
ceiling of an expression is approximated by just the expression
in (20), closed-form solutions for probabilities pi , i = 1,2,..., h
that minimize the resulting cost of communication E[C] have
not been obtained, but can be found numerically. Once the
optimal probabilities are obtained, following the same
arguments as in section III-B.2, ki , i = 1,2,...,h can be
calculated according to the equation,
In the above equation, α denotes the probability that the
number of hops between a member and the clusterhead in a
level-i cluster is more than ki , i = 1,2,..., h .