In structured P2P networks, document-level indexing has a high
cost of index-building and posting list retrieval, while peer-level
indexing has a high cost of query issuing. These costs are
interdependent, thus it is difficult to minimize all of them
simultaneously. To the best of our knowledge, there is no prior
work that considers this interdependency.
To address this issue, we propose an adaptive indexing technique
for search systems built on structured P2P networks. We propose
grouping the documents, considering each group as a “superdocument,”
and building the distributed index based on these
resulting super-documents. The correct grouping design
effectively trades-off index-building and posting list retrieval cost
for query issuing cost, resulting in a reduction in total cost.
Our contribution is twofold. First, we develop a probabilistic cost
model based on the term distributions of local shared documents
and user queries. Our model allows us to estimate quickly the
total cost of the group-level indexing technique for a given
number of groups. Based on this model, we identify the best
number of groups for each peer. Second, we develop a cost-based
distance function to guide document grouping process, which is
also based on the term distributions of local documents and user
queries.
Our experimental results reveal that neither extreme solutions of
document-level indexing or peer-level indexing is good for all
situations. In general, given particular system conditions –
particularly message size – one extreme solution will be more
cost-effective than the other while the best solution is somewhere
in between. Our adaptive indexing technique identifies the best of
these solutions. The adaptive solution reduces cost by up to 46%
peer-level indexing and by 73% compared with document-level
indexing. Our experiments also show that cost-based distance
function is better than similarity-based distance functions,
reducing cost by up to 25%.
We are working on techniques that build semantic indices over
the peers’ contents, which help reduce the number of posting lists
in the network (dimension reduction), and also support semantic
searching. Indexing peers’ contents using each term as one
dimension is unscalable approach. For example, a peer sharing
thousands terms needs to contact this number of peers when
joining the network to index its content. This is clearly a very
costly activity. Semantic indexing, such as the Latent Semantic
Indexing technique, can relieve this problem by significantly
reducing the number of dimensions (i.e., identifying a small
number of concepts, and use each concept as a dimension).
Unfortunately, current P2P information retrieval systems either do
not support semantic search, or require global knowledge to build
the semantic index.