Advances in MEMS technology has enabled the development
of small, inexpensive electronic microsensor
devices (e.g. Berkeley Motes [11], MIT amps
nodes [3]) that integrate radio, sensing and processing
components. This, along with the development of
portable operating systems that can be embedded into
sensor devices (e.g. TinyOS [8]) has made the deployment
of “drop and play” applications a reality. These
developments catalyze a wide spectrum of applications
involving large scale sensor networks, such as military
surveillance, biological monitoring and fault detection in
civil infrastructures. Data in such monitoring based sensor
networks is generated continuously, often at a very
rapid rate.
A major constraint in the effective wide-scale deployment
of such sensor networks is the limited battery power
that the devices rely on for their functionality. For example,
with no power management, the Mica motes [11]
can last approximately 7-10 days. Since sensors are usually
placed in environments with harsh conditions or embedded
in remote rugged terrain (e.g. ecosystem monitoring),
it is often difficult, if not impossible, to replenish
or replace the batteries. Developing energy-efficient
strategies for deploying wireless sensor network applications
is of utmost importance. Due to the fact that communication
cost in sensor networks is much higher than
computation cost [20], substantial energy savings can
be achieved by reducing the communication cost, sometimes
even at the cost of more computation. Much of the
prior work focuses on low duty-cycle operation for network
related operations such as routing and media access
with radio transmitters and receivers turned off whenever
possible to save power [10, 9]. We consider, however, a
technique that trades data quality for savings in communication
cost, when approximate answers can be accepted
by users. Another concern with wireless sensor network
protocols is their ability to achieve uniform power consumption
among the network components to extend the
overall lifetime of the network without loss of connectivity.
We show how the proposed technique can be exploited
to achieve this goal by adjusting error tolerances
for sensors and sensor groups.
Error is inherent in sensor networks. Variations in the
sensing process, environmental factors and communication
latencies introduce noise and imprecision into the
sensor data received at the aggregation node. Although
sophisticated techniques have been devised to improve
the quality of sensor generated data, such as sensor fusion
[2], exact results are difficult to achieve. This implies
that even if sensor readings are captured exactly, it
is still impossible to have a precise representation of realworld
phenomena. Fortunately, in practice, monitoring
queries usually require information about a group of sensors
at a specific level of accuracy. This enables that the
error constraints be defined on groups of sensors (not on
an individual sensor). While the basic nature of the inaccuracy
remains unchanged, the protocol designer nowhas
a margin of flexibility - not every violation of accuracy on
sensor needs to be reported to the server. In-network aggregation
can specifically help eliminate messages to the
server if the group quality constraints are satisfied even
though sensor error bounds may be violated. This is especially
useful under conditions of random noise where
early aggregation can take advantage of the fact that positive
and negative noise factors can cancel each other out.
Researchers are beginning to explore sensor database
technology, from semantics, architecture, to in-network
query processing [16, 23, 17]. In network community,
cluster-based routing and data gathering has been identified
to be the most efficient communication technique for
large-scale wireless sensor networks. Several protocols
have been proposed [7, 15, 24]. Clusters are constructed
to gather data locally before the data is forwarded to a
server for final processing. The clusters can form a hierarchical
structure. In this paper, we consider aggregate
monitoring queries over a set of sensors in a wireless
sensor network. A large class of sensor network applications
are primarily designed to monitor the physical
world; continuous queries are a natural fit in this scenario.
The goal of this paper is to devise techniques and
protocols for adapting the processing of aggregate monitoring
queries in a sensor network in order to (a) satisfy
monitoring quality constraints (b)minimize cost of query
processing and (c)maximize the lifetime of the sensor
network by balancing the workload at the sensor nodes.
We present an adaptive protocol for data aggregation that
minimizes communication overhead while guaranteeing
error-bounds. The protocol also adaptively balances the
workload of the clusters by manipulating the associated
sensor values and the error tolerances of individual sensors.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we introduce some necessary background and formulate
the approximate monitoring problem. Section 3
presents an adaptive approximate aggregate monitoring
protocol(A3) to process aggregate queries in a sensor network.
Section 4 discusses the adaptive adjustment of error
tolerances. Section 5 evaluates the performance of
the proposed strategies for clustering and adaptation. We
review related works in section 6.