We simulated the algorithm described in Section III for
networks with varying sensor density ( d ) and different values
of the parameters p and k . In all these experiments, the
communication range of each sensor was assumed to be 1 unit.
Fig. 1 shows the output of one of these simulations of our
algorithm with parameters p and k set to 0.1 and 2 on a
network of 500 sensors distributed uniformly in a square area
of 100 square units.
To verify that the optimal values of the parameters p and
k of our algorithms computed according to (10) and (12) do
minimize the energy spent in the system, we simulated our
clustering algorithm on sensor networks with 500, 1000 and
2000 sensors distributed uniformly in a square area of 100 sq.
units. Without loss of generality, it is assumed that the cost of
transmitting 1 unit of data is 1 unit of energy. The processing
center is assumed to be located at the center of the square area.
For the first set of simulation experiments, we considered a
range of values for the probability ( p ) of becoming a
clusterhead in the algorithm proposed in Section III. For each
of these probability values, we computed the maximum number
of hops ( k ) allowed in a cluster using (12) and used these
values for the maximum number of hops allowed in a cluster in
the simulations. The results of these simulations are provided in
Fig. 2. Each data point in Fig. 2 corresponds to the average
energy consumption over 1000 experiments. It is evident from
Fig. 2 that the energy spent in the network is indeed minimum
at the theoretically optimal values of the parameter p
computed using (10) (let us call this optimal value popt ),
which are given in Table I for 500, 1000 and 2000 sensors in
the network.
Most of the clustering algorithms in the literature (LCA [2],
LCA2 [8] and the Highest Degree [9, 24] algorithms) have time
complexity of O(n) , which makes them less suitable for
sensor networks that have large number of sensors. The Max-
Min d-Cluster Algorithm [5] has a time-complexity of O(d) ,
which may be acceptable for large networks. Hence, we have
compared the performance of our proposed algorithm (with
optimal parameter values) and the Max-Min d-cluster
algorithm (for d = 1,2,3,4 ) in terms of the energy spent in the
system using simulation.
The experiments were conducted for networks of different
densities. For each network density we used our algorithm
(described in Section III) to cluster the sensors, with the
probability of becoming a clusterhead set to the optimal value
( popt ) calculated using (10) and maximum number of hops
( k ) allowed between any sensor and its clusterhead equal to
the value calculated using popt in (12).
The computed values of popt and the corresponding values
of maximum number of hops ( k ) in a cluster for networks of
various densities are provided in Table I. The results of the
simulation experiments are provided in Fig. 3. We observe that
the proposed algorithm leads to significant energy savings. The
savings in energy increases as the density of sensors in the
network increases.
