In this subsection, we discuss how the system can determine the
IP address for any site needed during query processing. Recall that
the mapping of IDable nodes to sites is arbitrary and dynamically
changing. However, there are only two situations in which IP addresses
are needed during query processing: (1) when the query
initially is posed by a user somewhere in the Internet, and (2) when
a site manager determines that it needs to pose a subquery to a specific
IDable node. We consider each situation in turn.
Self-starting distributed queries. Users anywhere on the Internet
can pose queries. For scalability, we clearly do not want to send all
queries to the site(s) hosting the root node of the hierarchy. Instead,
our goal is to send the query directly to the lowest common ancestor
(LCA) of the query result. But how do we find the site that owns the
LCA node, given the large number of nodes and the dynamic mapping
of nodes to sites? Our solution is (1) to have DNS-style names
for nodes that can be constructed from the queries themselves, (2)
to create a DNS server hierarchy identical to the IDable node hierarchy,
and (3) to use DNS lookups to determine the IP addresses of
the desired sites. Recall that each IDable node is uniquely identified
by the sequence of IDs on the path from the root to the node.
Thus our DNS-style names are simply the concatenation of these
IDs. For example, for the query in Figure 2, its LCA node is New
York. We construct the DNS-style name
city-new york.state-ny.usregion-ne.parking.ourdomain.net
perform a DNS lookup to get the IP address of the New York site,
and route the query there.
A key feature is that no global information is needed to produce
this DNS-style name: it is extracted directly from the query! We
have a simple parser that processes the query string from its beginning,
and as long as the parser finds a repeated sequence of /elementname[@
id=x], it prepends to the DNS name. The DNS lookup
may need several hops to find the appropriate DNS entry, but then
this entry is cached in a DNS server near to the query, so subsequent
lookups will find the IP address in the nearby DNS server.
Note that no information about the XML document (or its schema)
is needed by the parser.
Sending a subquery. When a site manager determines that a query
requires data not in its site database, then by our invariants, it has
the root-to-node ID path for the IDable node it needs to contact.
To see this, observe that each piece of missing data is in the local
information of some IDable node. Consider one such IDable node
+ . By invariant (I1), this node is owned by a different site. By
invariant (I2), regardless of + ’s status value, we have its ID, and the
IDs of all its ancestors. Thus we can produce the DNS-style name
for any needed IDable node solely from the information in the site
database, and then perform the lookup to get the IP address. A
key feature of this design is that the mapping of IDable nodes to
IP addresses is encapsulated entirely in the DNS entries, and not
in any site databases. This makes it relatively easy to change the
mapping as desired for load balancing and other purposes.