We have shown so far how default values can be maintained
in the data updating process to ensure invariance
(1). We also fixed the error bounds for each node so
that invariance (2) also holds. But this may not be costefficient,
since different source sensors may exhibit different
types of behavior. For those sensors whose values
do not change very much, it is beneficial to assign them
smaller error tolerances and assign the slack saved this
way to other more active sensor nodes. We exploit this
insight to design an approximate algorithm to adaptively
adjust the error tolerance at each node in order to achieve
an overall balance on communication activity by allowing
sensor nodes update at similar frequencies.
On the other hand, balanced workloads may also result
in reduced overall workload, although optimality is
not guaranteed due to the unknown nature of data behavior.
Figure 3 shows one case that can illustrate the benefit
of having balanced workload. Assume data readings of
the two sensor nodes in different rounds are within some
ranges (r1 and r2). And assume the total error tolerance
allowed is also the same. It is obvious
that the distribution in figure 3(a) will generate some
messages while the distribution in figure 3(b) will not.
The best adjustment technique could be developed if
the data behaviors can be predicted, which is impossible
in real applications. Learning the distributions of data by
fitting statistical models can also be a good solution. But
due to the limited storage and computing power of sensor
nodes, those strategies will be too complex to implement.
We propose a simple strategy for estimating sensor
node workloads based on update frequencies. Other factor
such as resource constraints (e.g. power level) can be
assimilated into the estimation as well. In the A3 protocol,
an adjustment is always initiated by a parent node
who keeps in its cache default values and error bounds of
all its children. In order to know the workloads of child
nodes, the parent node also keeps a record of the update
frequency, f, for all its children over certain period of
time in history. This time period can be envisioned as
a time-driven or round-driven sliding window. Then f is
the number of updates a child node makes during the time
window. In our experiments, we set all window sizes to
32 (rounds).
At each time an adjustment is activated at a parent
node, our algorithm adjusts only two child nodes who
have maximum and minimum update frequencies. An
overall balance among sibling nodes will be achieved in
a long run. We use the following criterion to initiate the
adjustment:
where fmax is the maximum frequency and fmin is
the minimum. rth is a threshold we choose for the algorithm.
We represent error tolerances corresponding to
fmax and fmin by Afmax and Afmin. Then we can reset
the error tolerances using the following formulae:
In the formulae,  is an adjustment factor which allows
us to keep part of the previous error tolerance and redistribute
the other part between the two (min and max
update frequency) nodes. The value of  should be chosen
based on the sensitivity of the update value. Care
should be taken to ensure that the choice of  do not
cause any oscillation effect in which frequency of node
with fmax becomes too small after the adjustment and
that of node with fmin gets too large. The basic A3 protocol
can be enhanced by selecting rth and  adaptively.
Once an error adjustment action is taken by a tree node,
the node waits for a fixed number of rounds before attempting
another adjustment. This is necessary to factor
in the time lag between the error adjustment and the actual
impact on the update frequencies.
For a 2-level architecture, the AP and cluster-heads
are in charge of the error bound adjustment process. For
a multi-level structure, similar to the resetting process of
default values, the effect of error bounds being changed
must be propagated to descendants. Special care needs
to be taken in the propagation since reducing the error
bound on a node is an unsafe operation and may cause
the total error bound on a node’s children to be greater
than the reduced bound on a node. This may result in
incorrect results for monitoring queries. To handle this,
we can introduce the notion of “safe operation” and “unsafe
operation” similar to those used in [1]. An unsafe
operation can only be committed after the unsafe operations
on child nodes are committed. In another words,
if a node has its error bound reduced, it can not perform
approximate aggregation until all children (and thus, descendants)
have reduced their error bounds. On the other
hand, enlarging error bound is a safe operation that will
not yield incorrect results. The operation can be committed
any time.