My initial research focused on the architectural issues that arise in sensor query processing with respect to the
central query processor. This research has identified a number of areas where a query processing engine can be
modified to make it better suited to queries over sensor data:
?? Fjords and Sensor Proxies: These two concepts form the core of the DBMS side sensor query processing
system that is a part of the Telegraph [19] dataflow system under development at UC Berkeley. A Fjord is
a modified query plan-like data structure which facilitates the combination of streaming data from sensors
with traditional, disk-based data sources. Fjords allow query processors to be tolerant to intermittent and
lossy data streams, since they compute only when sensor tuples are pushed into them, avoiding blocking
that would arise in the traditional iterator based processing [16].
A sensor proxy is a database operator that multiplexes multiple user queries over a collection of sensors.
It caches sensor readings, chooses appropriate sample rates for sensors based on sample rates from all
user queries, and attempts to shield sensors from having to serve many copies of the same data to different
queries.
A paper describing this work appeared in ICDE 2002 [28].
?? Continuously Adaptive Continuous Queries: Because sensors networks will be used to monitor large,
highly accessible spaces, there will be many simultaneous, similar queries over those networks. Traditional
continuous query research, such as the NiagaraCQ system from Wisconsin [6] allows multiple
related queries to share processing by identifying common portions of query plans and executing those
common portions only once. My research on continuously adaptive continuous queries (CACQ) extends
traditional CQ research in two directions: by enabling stream processing facilities for sensor data and
adding adaptivity to changes in the query workload over time.
A paper on continuously adaptive continuous queries will appear in SIGMOD 2002 [30].
?? Visualizations for Sensor Data: A third area of research has to do with visualizations of sensor data, and
the use of user interface to coordinate sensor readings with disk and Internet based data sources.