Sensor networks will become ubiquitous, and the
database community has the right expertise to address
the challenging problems of tasking the network and
managing the data in the network. We described a
vision of processing queries over sensor networks, and
we discussed some initial steps in in-network aggregation,
implications on the routing layer, and query
optimization. We have started at Cornell to design
and implement a prototype that allows us to experiment
with the design space of various algorithms and
data structures [6].
Future work. This work opens a plethora of new
research directions at the boundary of database systems
and networking. First, we believe that TDMA
MAC protocols will be very important in powerconstrained
sensor networks [27], and we plan to investigate
the interaction of a TDMA MAC layer with
routing and query processing in future work. In addition,
our current simulation assumes bidirectional
links, which is usually not true in practice. Having
filters as an additional interface to the routing layer
leaves many open questions, such as an efficient implementation
of filters, the order in which filters should
be evaluated, handling of conflicting actions, etc. We
assumed very simple SQL blocks as query templates
without discussing a full-fledges spatio-temporal query
language whose design is a challenging topic for future
work. In addition, we only scratched the surface of
query processing, metadata management, and query
optimization, and much work needs to be done multiquery
optimization, distributed triggers, and the design
of benchmarks. We anticipate that the emergence
of new applications, as well as the implementation and
usage of our prototype system will lead to other research
directions. We believe that sensor networks will
be a fruitful research area for the database community
for years to come.
Acknowledgments. We thank the DARPA SensIT
community for helpful discussions. Praveen Sheshadri
and Philippe Bonnet made influential initial
contributions to Cougar. The Cornell Cougar Project
is supported by DARPA under contract F-30602-99-
0528, NSF CAREER grant 0133481, the Cornell Information
Assurance Institute, Lockheed Martin, and by
gifts from Intel and Microsoft. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the sponsors.