We plan to explore the following future directions:
1. Learning in PREMON:
We plan to explore how one can incorporate learning
patterns of movement based on history, and use them
to guide the prediction-generation logic.
2. Duty Cycles:
A possible way of reducing the energy usage in a sensor
network is by reducing the duty cycle of sensors that
are not seeing frequent activities. Thus, we would like
to partition a sensor network into regions based on the
level of activity they see. For sensors in these dierent
types of areas, the duty cycle requirement is clearly
dierent. We plan to look at protocols for dynami-
cally partitioning a sensor eld into these dierent ar-
eas and adjust the duty cycles of sensors appropriately
to achieve near-optimal energy usage.
3. Extracting patterns at larger time-scales:
We observe that MPEG encoding algorithms only look
at patterns that occur in smaller time-scales. We be-
lieve that one may improve the accuracy of the pre-
dictions by extracting patterns that occur frequently
at medium and larger time-scales and using them to
improve predictions on smaller time-scales. As an ex-
ample, consider a sensor network consisting of acous-
tic sensors thrown over a battleeld. As a tank ap-
proaches an acoustic sensor, the sensor will record higher

Figure 10: Architecture of the system making use
of long-term patterns
amplitude in the sensed reading. The amplitude of the
sensed reading will reach a peak value and will start
decreasing as the tank passes by. If one were to look
only at pattern on a smaller time-scale, by seeing a
steady increase in amplitude of the reading, one would
predict that the amplitude of the sensed reading would
continue to rise. Similarly, by noticing a steady decline
in amplitude, one would predict that the amplitude of
the sensed reading will continue to decrease. However,
by processing the data over a longer time period, one
would be able to extract the signature pattern (steady
rise followed by steady decline) of a tank. If this in-
formation is given to the base station, it will be able
to identify the pattern just by looking at the steady
increase in amplitude. It would then predict not only
the steady rise in amplitude but also the steady decline
following that. Assuming that the signature pattern
is unique enough, this would substantially reduce the
number of prediction misses.
Extracting patterns on larger time-scales however can
be a computationally intensive task. We assume that a
powerful wired node in the wired network will do this
processing. The architecture of envisaged system is
illustrated in gure 10. The sensed reading are mined
by a \long-term predictor" for patterns that recur at
larger time scales. These long-term patterns are given
to the base station. The base station uses them as
input in its prediction process.
We are investigating two approaches for extracting long-
term patterns. One makes use of data-mining tech-
niques and the other is based on compression theory
(interested readers are referred to [5] for details). We
intend to evaluate the eectiveness of these mecha-
nisms.
4. Predicting aggregates:
In this paper, we have looked at predicting values of
sensors. However, in many instances one is interested
in the aggregate value over a small spatial region (e.g.,
what is the average temperature in DataMan Lab).
The challenge is to apply the PREMON paradigm to
predict the values of aggregates.

5. Simulations:
We are in the process of performing simulations to an-
alyze the performance of the proposed algorithms over
large sensor networks.