Preemptive Cache Prefetching (PCP) resembles NCP,
but adds the possibility that cache prefetching can be preempted
prior to filling the cache. For example, for data
recharging to truly resemble battery recharging, it must be
possible to “unplug” a device prior to its being fully charged
(i.e., before its cache is full) and still end up with useful data
in the cache. This implies that not only is the set of objects
chosen to fill a cache important, but so too is the sequence
in which these objects are put in the cache given that this
determines what are the potential partially-filled caches resulting
from premature disconnection.
To evaluate PCP strategies, we defined a “goodness”
function (?.&3?&Y? ) that scores the sequence of objects chosen
by any algorithm for placement in a cache. This function is
defined in terms of a profile, $, and a preemption probability,
$g^ , which is the probability that cache prefetching will
be interrupted prior to completion. If $c^ is 0, then prefetching
always results in a full cache and PCP reduces to NCP
(i.e., only the utility value of the final contents of the cache
matters in measuring the goodness of the result). On the
other hand, if , then goodness measures must also
consider the utility value for partially filled caches.
Definition 3.2 [Sequence Goodness] Given a profile,
preemption probability, and some ordering of objects,
the goodness of ? wrt $ and  is:
Intuitively, is the value of a full cache times
the probability that cache prefetching is not preempted
and . is the probabilistically weighted average
of values for all non-full caches, assuming that preemption
is equally likely to occur after any number of bytes have
been transmitted. Figure 4 illustrates how . is calculated
given the sequence of objects  .The graph
shown plots the value of the cache after each byte of an
object is sent. Note that the curve shown in Figure 4 is
stepwise linear, and further, every line has either 0 or infinite
slope. This is because the value of a cache does not
change while a given object is in the process of being delivered
to the cache, but increases by the added value of
the object once the entire object is contained in the cache.
Thus, the value of the cache will be 0 until the 1st object is
delivered (for bytes until the 2nd object
is delivered (for bytes     ),
until the 3rd object is delivered (for bytes
(), and so
on. Generalized over all objects that can appear in a non-
full cache (), and weighted by the probability
that prefetching will be preempted, we get.
Definition 3.3 (PCP) Given a finite set of objects , such
that for any object is its size, a profile , a cache
capacity : , and a preemption probability  , determine the
sequence, ? , (that is a permutation of
any subset of ) that satisfies the constraint,
and that maximizes the value of
In Section 4.3, we compare 3 heuristic algorithms that
approximate solutions to PCP. These algorithms are ordered
versions of the algorithms used for NCP, in that they simply
take the results that the algorithms produce for NCP and
order them according to the GREEDY algorithm.4