As we pointed out in Section 3.3, prefetching algorithms
that assume a single profile and an unshared cache can be
adapted to work with multiple profiles and a shared cache
by merging the multiple profiles into a single superprofile
that is representative of them all. The merged profile can
then be used as input to each of the prefetching algorithms
described in Section 3.
One complication brought on by profile combination is
the fact that different profiles may define domains that intersect
or that are even equivalent, even though they are
defined differently. In other words, for superprofiles we
must assume that any given object can belong to multiple
domains.11 This means that GREEDY must be adapted so
that it always chooses an object that gives the most added
value to the cache according to all of the utility equations
that give it value. (SA, because it chooses objects randomly,
need not be altered.)
We refer to the greedy algorithm that allows for objects
to belong to multiple domains as GREEDY. GREEDY
maintains 3 data structures as it uses an input superprofi￡Uil&e
to determines the contents of a cache:
: a Boolean membership matrix that specifies all of
the domains to which each object belongs. Thus, is
an  matrix such that ? is the size of the candidate
object set,is the number of domains defined by the
superprofile, and ?) iff object, , belongs to
domain,;
 : an added value vector that specifies for each of the
 domains, the change in value that would result from
adding an object from the domain to the current cache.
Note that unlike the membership matrix which can be
computed statically, the added value vector must be recomputed
every time an object is added to the cache;
and
: a size vector that specifies the size of each of the objects in the candidate object set. 
GREEDY
  begins by initializing the membership matrix,
added value vector (relative to an empty cache) and
size vector. It then chooses one object at a time to add to
the cache, by following the steps below:
1. First, it computes the ? element vector, :  ) e﹐oEo .
For any object, -8, :?E?ktA is the value that object would
add to the current cache if it were inserted (without
replacing any existing object in the cache).
2. Next, it computes the ? element vector, :?x)o:?'a? .
For any object, -38, : ?ktA is the value per byte that object
would add to the current cache.
3. Next, it finds the maximum value in :?, :?E?kMA, and
designates object -8 as the next object to add to the
current cache.
4. Next, it updates the added value vector to reflect domain
values relative to the new cache.
5. Finally, it removes column kfrom e to reflect that object,
-8, is no longer eligible to be added to the cache.
This process is repeated until the candidate object set contains
no more objects that can fit in the remaining cache
and that add value to the cache. Note that GREEDY
is far more expensive than GREEDY (which simply c￡Uiy&-
cled through the added value vector looking for the domain
which added the most value to the cache), as it requires
a matrix-vector multiplication be performed for every
object chosen. We use some tricks to reduce the cost
of GREEDY
. For one, we partition the set of candidate
objects into classes, where objects in a given class belong
to the same set of domains. This allows us to reduce
the size of one dimension of the Boolean matrix (from the
number of objects in the candidate object set to the number
of classes). Also, every time an object is added to the
cache, we keep track of which domains have their values
affected. For example, in the case of the Traveler profile
of Figure 1, adding a Di object to an empty cache only
changes the values for domains RC, Di and Ho. Any class
whose objects do not belong to any of the affected domains
need not be included in the matrix calculation (objects of
such classes would add the same value to the new cache
as they did to the previous cache). While these tricks reduced
the cost of GREEDY
 somewhat, our experiments
showed that this new version of GREEDY
 still does not
scale. We ran GREEDY
 assuming superprofiles of increasing
size (with candidate object sets, classes and cache
sizes increasing proportionally in the size of the superprofile)
and recorded the time GREEDY
￡Ui & required to determine
a cache. We also measured the value of the cache
constructed by GREEDY
  and compared it to that produced
by SA which was allowed to run for 30 minutes (by
setting its temperature to 30 and its timeout to 1 minute).
The results are shown in Table 5. Each row in the table
shows a run of GREEDY
  with a superprofile of size,,
where  denotes the number of single profiles merged to
construct the superprofile. Single profiles are chosen ran-
domly from the 96 randomly generated profiles described
in Section 4.1. All other parameters were determined as
functions of ?. The number of object classes was set to 
(i.e., twice the number of domains), under the assumpaftio?n
that domains in a superprofile can usually be clustered into
disjoint sets of related topics, and that objects from the candidate
set that belonged to multiple domains would belong
to domains from a single cluster. As the number of disjoint
clusters is bounded by the number of domains, we set the
number of classes to be twice the number of domains (also
accounting for objects that belonged to a single domain).
Each object class was assumed to contain 5000 objects, distributed
in size according to the distribution shown in Figure
2. The cache size was set to be to the maximum of 
MB and 8GB. 100 MB per client is widely considered to
be a useful metric for determining the size of a shared web
proxy cache [13]. u GB is the size of the shared web proxy
cache employed at Brandeis (serving 3000 clients). And the
average number of domains that classes included was set to
2. Given that there are domains in all, this means that
for any class, kand Domain, with probability,
As Table 5 shows, GREEDY
 scaled to before
its execution time took more than 3 hours. On the
other hand, SA (which always ran in 30 minutes) produced
competitive results with GREEDY
, suggesting that a randomized
approach is better suited for large scale cache
prefetching problems. This raises the possibility of twotiered
prefetching: data recharging might use GREEDY to
decide what to prefetch into an individual device cache, but
SA to manage the shared cache from which multiple data
recharging clients draw.