Extracting every noise-tolerant itemset in binary relations is a difficult task. Available
approaches usually suffer from scalability issues and no closedness constraint is
enforced, hence much redundancy in the returned collections.With relations of higher
arities, faint noise affects more and more the quality of the patterns. This article presented
an algorithm for the complete extraction of noise-tolerant patterns in arbitrary
n-ary relations. How much noise is tolerated is parameterized by as many integers as
there are attributes in the relation. In every pattern, these integers are upper-bounds
of the number of n-tuples involving an element from the related attribute domain,
encompassed by the patterns, but absent from the relation. This definition allows a
closedness constraint to support a lossless condensation of the extracted collections.
Furthermore, and thanks to the incremental computation of counters of absent n-tuples
in many subspaces of the relation, the proposed algorithm remains tractable on large
relations.
Relevant patterns were discovered in a real-life 4-ary relation involving more
than 100,000 tuples and mined under rather loose minimal size constraints. With
the possible enforcement of additional relevance constraints, which even more alleviate
the computational requirements, many applicative perspectives are opened up.
For instance, we are currently working on the analysis of large amounts of usergenerated
data on the Web. In such a context, the time is an essential dimension that
n-ary relations can take into consideration without having to drop another one. Synthetic
datasets have allowed to quantitatively assess the effectiveness and the efficiency
of the algorithm. By comparison with its main competitor, which tolerates noise in
a different way, this proposal has been shown to extract, orders of magnitude faster,
smaller pattern collections of higher quality. In this regard, this contribution increases
our understanding of the solution to bring to the unwanted alterations of the relation.
Nevertheless a complete approach usually cannot, in a reasonable time, tolerate as
much noise as contained in the data. As a consequence, the returned closed patterns
remain fragments (though larger fragments than without noise tolerance) of the hidden
patterns. To heuristically complement this approach, a hierarchical agglomeration of
the patterns (Cerf et al. 2009b) was developed.