The major portion of the running time of the sequential
algorithm is spent to calculate the support for itemsets.
We now present three techniques—cycle-pruning, cycleskipping,
and cycle-elimination to prune the number of
itemsets for which the support must be calculated. These
techniques rely on the following fact:
“A cycle of the rule s a multiple of a cycle of itemset  ”
Therefore, eliminating cycles as early as possible can
substantially reduce the running time of cyclic association
rule detection. Cycle-skipping is a technique for avoiding
counting the support of an itemset in time units, which we
know, cannot be part of a cycle of the itemset. Cycleskipping
is based on the following property:
“ If time unit 	
is not part of a cycle of an itemset
then there is no need to calculate the support for   in time segment”
However, cycle skipping is useful only if we have information
about the cycles of an itemset. But the cycles of an
itemset can be computed exactly only after we compute
the support of in all the time segments! In order to avoid
this self-dependency, we try to approximate the cycles of
itemsets. To do this, we will use a technique we call cycle
pruning. It is based on the following property:
“If an itemset has a cycle, then any of the subsets of has the cycle !  ”
The above property implies that any cycle of itemset
must be a multiple of a cycle of an itemset that is a subs et
of This also implies that the number of cycles of an
itemset is less than or equal to the number of cycles of
any of’s subset.
Therefore, one can arrive at an upper bound on the cycles
that an itemset

can have by looking at all the cycles of
the subsets of

. By doing so, we can reduce the number
of potential cycles of itemset

, which, in turn (due to
cycle-skipping), reduces the number of time units in which
we need to calculate support for
 
Thus, cycle-pruning is a
technique for computing the candidate cycles of an itemset
by merging the cycles of the itemset’s subsets.
However, it is possible in some cases that we cannot
compute the candidate cycles of an itemset. For example,
when we are dealing with singleton itemsets. In these
cases, we need to assume that an itemset

has every
possible cycle and therefore, calculate the support for

in
each time segment
 (except the time units eliminated
via support-pruning). This is, in fact, what the sequential
algorithm does.
Example 1: If we know that 010 is the only large cycle
of item
and 010 is also the only large cycle of item
then cycle-pruning implies that the itemset consisting  of
items
and
can have only the cycle 010 or its multiples.
Cycle-skipping suggests that we do not need to calculate
the support for 
in every time segment but only in
every third one starting with
Example 2: If we know that 010 is the only large cycle of item
and 001 is the only large cycle of item then
cycle-pruning implies that the itemset cannot have
any cycles. Cycle-skipping suggests that we do not need to
calculate the support for in any of the time segment.
We now introduce one more optimization technique we
call cycle-elimination that can be used to further reduce
the number of potential cycles of an itemset Cycleelimination
is used to eliminate certain cycles from further
consideration once we have determined they cannot exist.
Cycle-elimination relies on the following property:
“If the support for an itemset is below the minimum
support threshold in time segment then
cannot have any of the cycles   mod    	 
  
”
Cycle-elimination enables us to discard cycles that an itemset
cannot have as soon as possible as demonstrated in
the following example.
Example 3: If the maximum cycle length we are interested
isand the support for itemset
is below the threshold	  	
in the first
time units, then cycle-elimination
implies that cannot have any cycles. Cycle-skipping
suggests that there is no need to calculate the support for
in time units greater than