Table 4 shows “goodness” calculations (Definition 3.2)
for GREEDY, SA and BnB over all 24 profile classes assuming
preemption probabilities of ), (likely preemption),
), (equally likely preemption and completion),
and ), (unlikely preemption). As with
the NCP results, we have normalized the goodness values
by expressing them as percentages of the goodness values
achieved by GREEDY. The table shows, for each profile
class, the average of these normalized values over the the
four profiles belonging to that class. Once again, GREEDY
produces better caches for more profile classes than SA and
BnB, producing the best caches for . profile classes
when the probability of preemption is high, for [profile
classes when the probability of preemption is moderate,
and for  profile classes when the probability of preemption
is low.
By comparing tables 3 and 4, it becomes clear that the
algorithm that does best for NCP usually does best for PCP
when given the same parameter settings. The only four
cases where this is not the case are listed below:
where for each, SA has produced the best result for NCP
and GREEDY has produced the best result for PCP. Figure 5
illustrates what is happening in these cases. The graph in
this figure shows how GREEDY, SA and BnB give value to
a cache over “time”9 for the case where )?,
and )? . Note how SA produces the highest value
cache once the cache is filled, but that GREEDY usually produces
the best partially filled caches,10 thereby confirming
the anomalous results.
The explanation for cases (1)-(3) is as follows: for each
of these cases, )fe1) and the profiles are appreciating.
For appreciating profiles, when  and A are large,
it likely will take a while (i.e., many objects placed in the
cache) before a random algorithm produces a cache with
sufficient numbers of objects of domains with appreciating
utility values to give high value to those objects. Therefore,
what is common to these cases is that SA produces
a cache that has relatively low value for a long time, and
then increases in value suddenly, overtaking the value of
the cache produced by GREEDY by the time the cache is
full. Because the value of the cache produced by SA was
low for so long, the area under the curve is less for SA than
for GREEDY. Case 4 is more subtle. Note that for ),
])?E, ) and ?) , SA beats GREEDY for
NCP but loses to GREEDY for PCP. On the other hand, if
) (and all other parameters are the same), SA beats
GREEDY for both NCP and PCP. When?)* instead of
), it takes fewer objects in the cache to give high
value to those with appreciating utility values. Thus, one
might think that with )] , an early and sharp increase
in object value would lead SA to beat GREEDY for PCP. But
in fact the opposite is true: GREEDY beats SA for PCP in
this case, but loses to SA when  ) (i.e., when the increase
in object value occurs at the same time, but to a far
lesser degree). The explanation for this phenomenon again
lies with the way we generate random values for  and 
 .
Always, our technique is to first generate a random value
between 50 and 100, assign it to the variable that is supposed
to be larger (for appreciating equations, 
 ), and set
the value of the other variable according to the value of associated with the profile class. Note that when ) ,
this means that  will always be less than or equal to 10, but
when ) ,  can be as high as 50. Therefore, when
) , the initial values of the cache produced by SA
are so low, that when $c^ is large (thus favoring early values
of the cache in calculating goodness), even a sharp increase
in object value is not enough to make SA beat GREEDY for
PCP. On the other hand, when  )? , initial values of the
cache are large enough that SA beats GREEDY at PCP.
The key lessons learned from our experiments for NCP
and PCP is that despite the apparent complexity of profiles
that include data dependencies and thresholds, a fairly simple
and fast algorithm (GREEDY) works quite well in processing
such profiles to decide what to prefetch into a cache.
Further, the cases where SA produces a better cache than
GREEDY (profiles with predominantly appreciating utility
equations) are arguably, unlikely to occur in practice.
