Privacy leakage has been examined from various angles:
characterization [11, 12], prevention techniques and tools [16,
1]. With the radical shift in the number of users worldwide
onto online social networks (OSNs), there are new and signi
cantly higher privacy leakage concerns as compared to
traditional Web sites. OSN users are encouraged to share
a variety of personal identity-related information, including
physical, mental, cultural, and social attributes. Users who
do this often believe that such information accessible to the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for prot or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the rst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specic
permission and/or a fee.
WOSN'08, August 18, 2008, Seattle, Washington, USA.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-182-8/08/08 ...$5.00.
OSN and maybe their \friends" on that OSN. In reality,
the set of entities that can have access to various bits of
private information is large and diverse: third-party advertisers
and data aggregators, members in the OSN who are
not friends of the user, and external applications. Also, if
external actions taken by users while logged in to an OSN
are tracked, such information can be used not just for marketing
purposes, but shared with friends of the user leading
to personal embarrassment. Facebook beacons1 recently exempli
ed this problem and Facebook changed their policy.
For this work, we dene the notion of privacy \bits" (pieces
of information) for a user within an OSN2, grouped together
for setting of privacy controls, as shown in Figure 1. Ideally
such grouping can be controlled by the user (as shown for the
two users in the gure), but for existing OSNs such grouping
is xed by the OSN. Within an OSN, user's privacy settings
dictate a left to right partial ordering of these groups with
more private bits on the left and less private ones as we move
right. Stacked privacy groups indicate groups with the same
privacy settings. We explore this partial ordering in more
detail as we examine the default privacy settings for OSNs
as well as how OSN users make use of these settings.
Figure 1 also shows the ow of information among OSNs,
external applications, third-party servers, and traditional
Web sites. One current problem is that the manner in which
private information is gathered by the various entities is often
hidden. It is dicult for the user to know and control
the various entities who can gain access to their information
and to limit in such a way that it does not erode their ability
to take full advantage of the various features of the OSN.
On some OSNs, such as Facebook, the choice varies from
ne-grained settings for some features, to all or nothing in
others. For example, when an external application is added
by a user, the user must grant access to all of one's information
to use the application. This is true even when the
external application may need only a few relevant bits of private
information or none at all. The granularity with which
consent to access private information can be withheld is an
important notion that we examine. Our goal is to see how
to reduce privacy leakage while still enabling access to all
the features of a OSN including use of external applications.
We also examine how OSNs group and provide a range
of privacy settings for these bits. We study the default privacy
settings for a variety of popular OSNs and if/how users
modify them. The two dominant OSNs, Facebook and MySpace,
account for a large portion of the market share [8,
13]. Other popular OSNs we examine include Bebo, Digg,
Friendster, Hi5, Imeem, LiveJournal, Orkut, Xanga, as well
as the smaller and newer micro-content network Twitter.
For these OSNs we characterize and study privacy, along
with its potential for leakage by examining the bits of private
information that a user supplies. We look at the allowable
and default options for controlling what other OSN parties
that can access the private information. We also study the
involvement of third-party advertisers and data aggregators
in tracking the actions of a user interacting with a OSN.
Section 2 describes the various bits of private information
associated with user accounts on OSNs and who can access
them. Section 3 examines if users change their privacy
settings when allowed. Section 4 studies the role of thirdparty
domains in aggregating user-related data and contrast
it with their role in traditional Web sites. Section 5 looks at
how privacy protection could be provided in OSNs by tailoring
the actual privacy bits needed for specic interactions on
OSNs. Section 6 presents related work and the concluding
Section 7 includes future work.
