Previous work in sensor databases has focused primarily on networks
of closely co-located sensors with limited resources [5, 26,
27]. The sensor query processing system operates directly on continuous,
never-ending streams of sensor data that are pushed into
the query plans for continuous queries. The stream of data is viewed
as a streaming relation (e.g., in Fjords [26]) or a time series (e.g., in
Cougar [5]). These efforts have developed techniques for answering
continuous queries over streaming data and for performing certain
query processing tasks in the sensor network itself in order to
eliminate communication and extend sensor battery lifetimes.
This paper complements this previous work by addressing fundamental
challenges in distributed query processing over wide area
sensor databases. Based on the applications we were considering,
we sought to provide a more familiar abstraction of the database as
the collection of values corresponding to the most recent updates
(e.g., the currently available parking spaces). Even in this more traditional
setting, there were plenty of challenges to overcome. The
distributed database infrastructure in IrisNet shares much in common
with a variety of large-scale distributed databases. For example,
DNS [28] relies on a distributed database that uses a hierarchy
based on the structure of host names, in order to support nameto-
address mapping. LDAP [35] addresses some of DNS’s limitations
by enabling richer standardized naming using hierarchicallyorganized
values and attributes. However, a key difference is that
these efforts target a very narrow set of lookup queries (with very
limited predicates), not the richness of a query language like XPATH.
Abiteboul et al. [19] present techniques for materializing and
maintaining views over semistructured data. Answering queries
from views is a hard problem in general. Our caching infrastructure
differs significantly from this work in that we do not store or
use the queries that resulted in the caching of the data, only the
data itself. Our approach is more data-driven in nature. We generalize
subqueries, tag the data, and maintain certain invariants, all to
make our partial-match caching scheme tractable. There has been a
lot of work on caching in distributed databases, and object-oriented
databases. Franklin and Carey [22] present techniques for clientserver
caching in object-oriented databases. Various work [13, 12,
30, 3, 25, 4, 6, 29] discusses issues of data replication and replicate
management in distributed databases. Much of this work has
focused on maintaining replicas consistent with the original data,
with various levels of consistency guarantees. In our work, we take
the approach of not providing any strict guarantees of consistency.
We believe that for the kinds of applications for which wide area
sensor databases will be used, such strict guarantees are not required.
Depending upon the requirements of an application, it is
certainly possible to provide such guarantees by maintaining auxiliary
information about the replicas of the data in the system. Our
approach is more akin to DNS, in that it is based on specifying
consistency requirements with the queries, and using a time-to-live
(ttl) field associated with the cached copies in order to determine
staleness.
Recently, there has been a lot of interest in streaming data sources
and continuous query processing [9, 20, 18]. This work is related
to ours in that the sensor proxies can be thought of as producing
data streams, and continuous queries over such streams are quite
natural in such a system. To our knowledge, most of this work focuses
on a centralized system, whereas distributed data storage and
query processing is one of our main design goals. As a result, the
query processing challenges we face in our system are quite different.
Also, these systems assume that the streaming data sources are
relational in nature, whereas we use XML as our data model.
Although we propose a hierarchical, native XML storage approach
to wide area sensor databases, an alternative would be to
use a distributed object-relational database [32] to store the leaves
of the XML document (as discussed in Section 5). In our parking
space finder application, these would correspond to either the
blocks or the parking spaces. The hierarchy information can be
maintained either at a central server or along with the leaves themselves.
This approach has several critical disadvantages. First, the
hierarchy information becomes a bottleneck resource, as demonstrated
in our performance study. Approaches to avoid this bottleneck
would likely entail mimicking much of our hierarchical approach,
and hence would benefit from the techniques presented
in this paper. Second, the richness of XML allows transparent
schema changes, and the use of highly expressive languages such
as XPATH, XSLT or XQuery. Many queries that can be naturally
described using these languages are not easily expressible in SQL.
Third, use of such a database seriously restricts how data can be
partitioned among available sites, limiting opportunities for loadbalancing.
Our architecture also enables powerful caching semantics
naturally; we are not aware of any work on caching in objectrelational
databases that is equally as powerful. Much work has
also been done on storing XML using object-relational databases,
and publishing object-relational data as XML [15, 24, 33, 31]. This
work is orthogonal to the issues we discuss here, as the challenges
in our ? query processing come mainly from the single document
view of the data, and the distributed nature of our system.
Recent work on peer-to-peer databases [14, 7, 21, 16] is quite
closely related to our work. Although our data is organized hierarchically,
and for performance reasons, we expect the participating
sites to also have a hierarchical organization, this is not required
by our architecture. As such, the participating sites can be thought
of as peers cooperating with each other to store and query data.
In [14], distributed hash tables (DHTs) perform the analogous role
of the DNS server in our architecture in that both of them are used
to find relevant data satisfying a query. DNS is more attractive in
our scenario because of the hierarchical nature of our data. Our
work differs considerably in the actual query processing part itself
because of our use of XML and the XPATH query language. [21,
16] discuss issues of data placement, and caching in peer-to-peer
networks. The OLAP caching framework presented in [16] relates
quite closely to our caching framework, but handles different kinds
of data and queries.
There is a large body of literature on load balancing techniques
for parallel and distributed systems (e.g., [17, 8, 23, 11, 34, 10]).
Our current system provides a natural mechanism for performing
load balancing, but we have not yet determined effective load balancing
policies for our setting.