Sensor-actuator networks can provide the
ability to continuously monitor the integrity of
structures in real-time, detect damage at an
early stage, and provide robustness in case of
catastrophic failures. Sensor-actuator networks
require a new paradigm of
computing—to address less capable hardware,
unreliable communication with limited bandwidth
and severe energy constraints. We are
developing algorithms and software tools that
facilitate the monitoring and protection of
civil infrastructure using sensor-actuator
networks. Specifically, our research addresses
problems of communication and
coordination in such networks.
A key idea in our approach is to push
more processing onto the embedded nodes—
thus providing greater robustness through
decentralization: correct behavior is guaranteed
using statistical reasoning. Another
benefit of this approach is that the cost and
complexity of wiring large, dense sensor
2
arrays may be reduced through the use of
wireless communication if it is used as a
primary means of communication. Alternately,
wireless communication can be used as a
back-up to provide fault-tolerance.
Sensing and actuation need to be correlated
in time and space. In order to facilitate
such coordination, we develop the following
facilities:
‧ Time synchronization service: We use
these services for temporal correlation of
measurements between custom accelerometer
sensors mounted on an
experimental model structure.
‧ Node localization service: We employ
several techniques—including triangulation
using distance estimates based on
acoustic ranging, and proximity calculations
which are based only on neighbor
knowledge—to determine the physical location
of sensors. Besides enabling spatial
correlation of sensor measurements and
actuation control, embedded node locations
are used to direct wireless message
traffic.
‧ Model-based data aggregation service:
Embedded processors may eliminate redundant
information directly at the sensor
node, thus reducing the amount of transmitted
and stored data. We have applied
this service to effectively cancel vibrations
caused by an impulse disturbance to a
beam in simulations.
‧ Tracking service: we have leveraged the
location information to develop a tracking
service based on binary detection sensors
and (piece-wise) linear trajectory prediction.
In addition to the above services, we
are implementing a scalable sensor network
simulator to assist in the development of
services and applications. This tool simulates
three key aspects of a sensor network: the
sensor nodes, the data network and the environment
with which the sensors interact. We
plan to interface the simulator with real sensor
nodes, thus enabling real and simulated scenarios
to be replayed for testing purposes.
Our services have been prototyped in
simulation and deployed on Crossbow MICA-
2 Motes (Crossbow 2003).