Figure 15 shows the number of patterns Fenster and DCE + post-process extract in
the synthetic ternary relations. In both cases, these quantities are huge in comparison
with the actual number of hidden patterns (4). This confirms whatwaswritten to justify
the choice of a per-tuple quality measure: numerous fragments of the hidden patterns
are discovered. Because these fragments must be agglomerated with a method such
as Cerf et al. (2009b) (which has a time complexity that is quadratic in the number
of fragments to agglomerate), a smaller number of patterns is preferable so that the
agglomeration can be achieved in a reasonable time. In this regard, Fenster (Fig. 15)
appears far preferable to DCE (Fig. 15b) especially in the contexts where little noise
affects the data. The reason to this difference is the use (or, forDCE, the lack thereof) of
the closedness constraint, which condenses the collection of patterns without any loss
of information (see Sect. 2.2). DCE cannot efficiently enforce this constraint because
the patterns tolerating noise in a relative way do not satisfy a downward closure pro
(stated with our terminology: DCE’s sub-patterns of a connected closed patterns are
not necessarily connected). For instance, when no noise affects the data, DCE not only
outputs the four hidden patterns (like Fenster does) but also all their sub-patterns as
long as they have at least four elements per attribute (the minimal size constraints).
Naturally, not using DCE’s filtering post-process provides even more patterns.
The evolution of the number of closed ET-3-sets when the noise varies is explained
by the increasing fragmentation which, at some points makes the patterns so small
that they do not satisfy the minimal size constraints. In the very noisy relations, tolerating
too much noise ( ? {3, 4}) leads to the extraction of patterns covering the
false-positive 3-tuples, hence a new increase in the size of the extracted collections.
With the 4-ary relations, the results are similar but the latter increase of the number
of closed ET-4-sets occurs at lower levels of noise and with less tolerance to noise
because the number of 4-tuples outside the hidden (hence, the number of false-positive
tuples) is greater.
