Given the sensor-catalog as a way to identify motes, it is possible to explore techniques for doing in-network
query processing. The first attempt at such a technique is a system for computing aggregates. Aggregation is the
process in which standard statistics are computed over groups of data items. In a sensor network, this involves
two tasks: identifying groups, and computing statistics over members of those groups. The goal of in-network
aggregation is to reduce the cost of computing aggregates from the naive solution where each sensor reports its
values to a central query processor that determines group membership and computes statistics locally.
As a part of my work with the TinyOS group, I have developed a technique called TAG (Tiny AGregation)
for computing aggregates in a more efficient way than simply sending all sensor readings to a centralized workstation
for processing. The approach works by taking advantage of the routing topology used by sensor networks
to propagate messages from one sensor to another, so it is necessary to understand the basic routing algorithm
used in large sensor networks. 1
Routing works as follows: network topologies are represented as connectivity graphs, upon which a routing
tree is overlaid. To route a message to some node

, the message is introduced at some root node, which broadcasts
the message to its children, which in turn broadcast that message to their children, and so on, eventually
reaching node

. During this routing process, each node chooses a single parent, thus forming a routing tree
which can be used to propagate messages from any node back to the root. When

wants to reply, it sends a
message to its parent, which sends a message to its parent, and so on, until the message reaches the root. Figure
7 shows a simple example of how a tree is built on the fly from an undiscovered routing topology as a message
propagates from the root to the leaves of the network.
Now, to compute an aggregate, the aggregate is introduced at the root of the network and propagated down
the graph of sensors to form a routing tree. Once an aggregate message has propagated down the tree, the leaves
propagate up a partial-aggregate, the value of the aggregate function is computed over just the local sensor
reading. The parents then compute a new partial aggregate which combines their children’s values with their
own local readings and propagate that value up. This continues to the root of the network, where the final value
1Note that the TAG algorithm is independent of a specific routing protocol; the protocol presented here is an example of a commonly
used, simple approach.
of the aggregate is computed.
A paper on this work has been submitted to VLDB 2002 [29]. This paper classifies aggregate functions according
to their state requirements and semantic properties. This classification partitions aggregates according to
their memory requirements and functional properties (e.g. monotonicity) and uses that partitioning to generalize
about their behavior in the face of network errors and the applicability of various optimizations. A number of
experiments on the storage and communication of each type or aggregate are also presented. Additionally, the
paper presents techniques for handling grouping (and the limited storage available on sensor nodes), and for
mitigating the effects of loss due to low-quality radio links in the current generation of TinyOS hardware.
Figure 8 (from [29]) shows an example of the benefit of the TAG approach, in terms of the aggregate number
of bytes that must be sent by all sensors in the network, for a variety of different aggregation functions. In the
simulation used to generate this graph, sensors were placed on a fully-packed grid of the specified diameter;
sensor values were randomly selected from the uniform distribution over the range [0,1000]. MEDIAN, MAX,
and COUNT, and AVERAGE are standard statistical functions; HISTOGRAM partitions values into a fixed number
of bins; DISTINCT counts the total number of distinct sensor values reported. MEDIAN requires all values to
be sent to the root of the network, and thus its performance matches the centralized algorithm. Other aggregates,
however, show a substantial reduction in the number of messages: better than an order of magnitude over the
centralized approach in the case of simple aggregates like MAX and COUNT.
This completes the summary of the completed elements of the TeleTiny system. The next section summarizes
related work.