The qualities obtained with ternary relations are plotted in Fig. 11. In this setting, the
hidden patterns contain eight elements in every attribute domain (of 32 elements) and
the patterns are constrained to have at least four elements per attribute. According to
Fig. 11a, the best parametrization for Fenster is  = 2 when the level of noise is
below 0.15. At this point, the quality of the extracted collection of closed ET-3-sets
is almost perfect, whereas the collection of exact closed patterns shows a quality of
0.25. The noisiest settings are advantageously mined with  = 3. This confirms that
greater noise tolerances are preferred to mine relations suffering from higher levels of
noise.
Comparing these quality results with those of DCE allows to defend our choice
of a per-element tolerance to noise. In Fig. 11b, DCE considers the noise covered by
whole patterns and, doing so, the quality results are both worse and more sensitive to
the choice of the noise tolerance threshold. In particular, tolerating a little more noise
than necessary provides poor results. This is explained by the fact that an extracted
pattern is somehow allowed to “go beyond” an hidden pattern if the covered part of
the hidden pattern has not been altered by much noise. If this is the case, the tolerated
proportion of absent tuples is far enough from being reached to accept additional
elements outside the hidden pattern. Understanding this problem, the authors of DCE
have proposed a post-process that additionally forces each element of the pattern to
cover at most the chosen proportion of noise. With this post-process the only difference
with Fenster’s tolerance to noise relates to the absolute/relative dilemma.
Nevertheless, the ability to tolerate a greater number of absent tuples in larger patterns
does not affect the quality in this experiment, i. e., Fenster (see Fig. 11a) and DCE +
post-process (see Fig. 11c) extract patterns that cover the exact same tuples.
Fenster and DCE are tested on 4-ary relations. The experimental protocol still
follows what Sect. 5.1 details. The hidden patterns contain four elements in every
attribute domain (of 16 elements) and the patterns are forced to have at least two elements
per attribute. Figure 12 plots the qualities obtained in this setting. Whatever the
level of noise, Fenster (see Fig. 12a) outputs better collections of closed ET-4-sets
with  = 1 than without any tolerance to noise (i. e.,  = 0).With a noise level of 0.25,
the quality of the collection of exact closed 4-sets is below 0.3, whereas it reaches 0.65
when  = 1. Furthermore, because of the loose minimal size constraints,  = 2 is
too high. Comparing Fenster’s results with those of DCE with (Fig. 12c) and without
(Fig. 12b) the filtering post-process leads to similar conclusions as those drawn
from the 3-dimensional case: the quality of the patterns globally tolerating noise is
far beneath that of the patterns tolerating noise per element and, in this latter context,
DCE’s relative tolerance to noise has almost no effect on the quality w.r.t. Fenster’s
absolute tolerance.
The worse quality results of a per-pattern tolerance to noise were explained by the
possibility for those patterns to “go beyond” the hidden patterns. The mere quality
measure is not enough to justify this explanation. That is why Fig. 13 plots the proportion
of the covered tuples that is outside the hidden patterns, i. e., |E\Rhidden|
|E| .When the
noise is tolerated per-pattern (Fig. 13b) instead of per-element (Fig. 13a), as Fenster
does, this quantity of incorrectly covered tuples clearly is higher. These results relate
to the experiment on 4-ary relations but a same conclusion is drawn from the analysis
of the patterns extracted in the ternary relations.
Fenster and DCE are now seen as binary classifiers of tuples (in the classes “being
covered by the hidden patterns” and “not being covered by the hidden patterns”) so
that ROC curves can be plotted.6 For a given noise level, such a curve represents
the proportion of correctly covered tuples, |E∩Rhidden|
|Rhidden| , in function of the proportion
of incorrectly covered tuples, |E\Rhidden|. Figure 14 shows the results obtained
from the experiment on 4-ary relations. For more clarity, the curves related to noise
levels up to 0.15 were omitted: they all coincide with the leftmost and topmost axises
of the plots, i. e., the hidden patterns are entirely covered before any false positive tuple
is ever covered. Every number written next to a point corresponds to the related noise
tolerance threshold. The ROC curves obtained with a per-element tolerance to noise
are similar to those obtained with a per-pattern tolerance to noise. This means that
the correctly and incorrectly covered tuples are “ranked” in about the same way when
moving from no tolerance to noise (where, obviously, the way to tolerate noise has no
influence on the output patterns) to tolerating much noise. Nevertheless, with DCE’s
per-pattern tolerance, increasing the density thresholdmore quickly leads to the upperright
corner of the ROC space (one can, for instance, compare the positions of DCE’s
points relating to a minimal density of 0.875 with those obtained by Fenster and an
absolute tolerance of 1). This reflects the greater sensitivity to parametrization that has
already been commented from the quality results. This difference is quite important in
practice because, contrary to a standard classification problem, the pattern extraction
is unsupervised and the analyst usually has no way to precisely know the level of noise
affecting the data, hence the optimal noise tolerance thresholds. The analog analysis
of the patterns extracted in the ternary relations leads to the same conclusions.
To limit the false-negative rate, stronger minimal size constraints can be used. By
requiring at least five (respectively three) elements per attribute of the ternary (respectively
4-ary) relations, none of the false-positive tuples are ever covered, i. e., the
ROC curves coincide with the leftmost axis of the ROC space. Unfortunately, many
true-positive tuples end up not being covered as well and the quality is worse. In fact,
from a noise level of 0.3 (respectively 0.25) and with the greatest noise tolerance
we have tested ( = 4), no closed ET-3-set (respectively closed ET-4-set) satisfy the
minimal size constraints.