The sequential algorithm runs the apriori algorithm on
each time segment. In order to determine the cycles of the
association rules, we need to determine the binary sequence
corresponding to each association rule. If there is space in
memory to hold a binary sequence for each association
rule, we can store the rules and their binary sequences in
a hash tree. After generating all the rules over all the time
segments, we can run cycle detection algorithms.
However, if we do not have enough memory to store the
rules and their binary sequences, we have to write the rules
out to disk as we generate them in each time unit. At the end
of finding association rules for all the time segments, we
need to construct the binary sequences for each individual
association rule. In order to do this,we merge the rules from
the different time segments. One this merging is done, we
can run the cycle detection algorithms.
Finally, if we do not have enough memory to store all the
data structures needed by the apriori algorithm, we have to
use one of the overflow management techniques suggested
in [AS94].
Like the apriori algorithm, the interleaved algorithm has
two distinct phases. In the first phase, all large itemsets with
cycles have their supports counted in the appropriate time
segments. In the second phase, rules are generated using
the cycle and support information of the large itemsets.
For the first phase, the interleaved algorithm proceeds
“level-by-level” to determine itemset support. It first determines
the itemset support for singleton candidate itemsets,
generates cycles for them, then generates itemsets of size
2 and their potential cycles, etc. In this phase, the interleaved
algorithm requires enough memory to hold all large
itemsets of a particular size and their support counts in
memory. (In addition, it needs to store the new candidates
and their “potential” cycles. The size of the latter is usually
much smaller.) If there is not enough memory, the support
counts are broken up into chunks and written to disk. After
processing all the time segments, the support counts are
merged in memory.
For the cyclic rule generation phase, if there is space
in memory to hold all the large itemsets and their support
counts for all the time units, rule generation can run
entirely in memory. However, if there is a shortage of
memory and there is space to hold only a single level
of large itemsets and their support counts, we can gen
the level of the largest itemset. For doing this, we can
use a modification of the ap-genrules procedure in [AS94]
that we call Level GenRuleCycles as shown in Figure 2.
Level GenRuleCycles is a set oriented rule generation procedure
that creates rules such that all rules needing to look
at the support counts of  -itemsets are generated during
during one iteration of the outer while loop. (Note that this
procedure can be profitably used, instead of ap-genrules,
for generating association rules when short of memory.)
Figure 2: Procedure used for cyclic rule generation.
For example, suppose we have the large itemset
with a cycle 001. Initially, ruleList is the emptyset an d
in the first iteration gets set to
sup-arrayABCD,In the next round,
are generated and tested. This
round keeps the support counts of all 3-itemsets in memory.
Suppose only and have cycles. ruleList becomes
. (Of course, large itemsets and
will get added to prev, but we ignore that
here to keep the example small.) In the next round, only the
rule is generated. This round keeps the support
counts of all the 2-itemsets in memory. If has a
cycle, ruleList is transformed to and vanishes in the next round.
This algorithm requires only one member of ruleList
to be in memory at any time. If the support counts of a
particular level do not fit into memory as well, one has to
sort ruleList according to the candidate rules that it stores
and merge the itemset support counts in order to generate
cyclic association rules.