The techniques discussed in this paper are the beginnings of a full-fledged system to extract data from and
execute queries over streams of data flowing from sensor networks. To increase their value, however, there are a
number of future directions I plan to explore for the remainder of my Ph.D.
The major push will be toward the construction of a real TeleTiny implementation that combines TAG and
the schema interface running on Berkeley Mica sensor motes with an adaptive query processing system such as
the Telegraph query processor. This construction effort will yield two significant pieces of research. The first
will be an evaluation of the performance and common-uses of my software as deployed in a real sensor-network
running on tens or hundreds of motes. Such a network is currently being deployed in the Intel research lab in
downtown Berkeley, and my summer employment will involve integrating TeleTiny (with instrumentation for
data collection) into this network and gather statistics about how it is used by lab denizens.
The second major research effort will be a characterization of the resource constraints that arise in sensor
query processing, and a set of techniques for limiting use of the resources and expressing constraints to users.
There are a number of resource-constraint problems that arise in TeleTiny: power, radio-bandwidth, and memory
are all limited resources that could easily be exhausted under heavy query workloads. Understanding how to
conserve these resources, and what control and feedback needs to be given to the user to maximize that conservation
is an important research area that will dramatically affect the usefulness of any sensor query processing
system. Some of the techniques needed in this area come directly from other sensor research: entering a very
low power state between data samples or radio-communications, for instance, is a goal of all TinyOS software.
Other techniques, such as suppressing values that change very little or that are superseded by the values of
neighboring sensors, are approaches unique to TeleTiny.
