Beyond revealing private information to other users within
an OSN, another potential source of privacy leakage is the
tracking of user actions by third-party advertisers and data
aggregators. In prior work, we dened and measured the
privacy footprint for a collection of roughly 1000 popular
traditional Web sites [11]. This privacy footprint is the set
of interactions formed when user retrievals of rst-partyWeb
pages cause retrievals of objects from, often hidden, thirdparty
domains3 as shown in Figure 1. These third-party
domains often act as aggregators of a user's traversals on
the Web. We found a large number of associations between
rst-party sites via shared third-party aggregation domains.
A natural follow-on question to this previous work is to
ask to what extent these third-party domains are used by
OSNs. These domains are particularly troubling for privacy
with OSNs because unlike most Web sites, users login
to OSN sites and store personal information about themselves
on these sites. If OSN sites are also making use of
third-party domains that are tracking user visits to these
and other Web sites then there is an even greater potential
for privacy loss. Previous work does conjecture that thirdparty
aggregation will be used less for OSNs because they
encourage users to \live" on their site [3].
In order to measure the use of third-party domains, we
rst established a set of actions to take for each of the OSNs
in our study. These actions are not exhaustive for any of
the OSNs, but represent common actions of a user while
interacting with each OSN site|whether they be interacting
with friends on Facebook or viewing a comment made by a
user on Digg. The specic set of actions used for each OSN
site, which we refer to as a session, is:
1. Login to site with account/password.
2. View friends or user contributed content.
3. Look at a friend's or contributor's prole.
4. Send friend a message or comment on content.
5. Return to user home.
6. View networks/groups.
7. Look at members in a network/group.
8. Logout from site.
While this session was being executed at each OSN, the set
of retrieved objects were recorded via the \Pagestats" Firefox
browser-extension [5], which records information about
each HTTP request and response. A session was performed
manually for each of the eleven OSNs with Pagestats logging
the retrieved objects. The post-processed log yielded
the list of third-party domains where at least one object
was retrieved for each OSN. This session and analysis was
repeated ve times for each OSN after observing that not
all actions always caused the same set of third-party objects
to be retrieved. Table 4 shows key results of our analysis
with the third-party domains most widely used. A 'X'
is used to indicate situations where the third-party domain
was used in the majority of the ve sessions executed at the
given OSN. The 9 third-party domains with at least three
X's are shown in the table. Another 12 third-party domains
(not shown) occur in a majority of sessions for two of the
OSNs and another 36 third-party domains occur in a majority
of sessions for one of the OSNs. To understand the
sensitivity of our results to the session of actions we choose,
we extended our session for a subset of the OSNs to include
writing on a comment wall, using an application, joining a
group and editing the user prole. These additional actions
did not result in the use of additional third-party domains
except for the applications, which caused the browser to
go to new third-party domains used by these applications.
We observed approximately one new third-party domain accessed
for each new applications we used.
Table 4 indicates much common usage across OSNs with
doubleclick.net and 2mdn.net consistently represented across
the 11 OSNs. Overall there is high usage of these third-party
domains by most OSNs. The median number of unique
third-party domains contacted at least once for an OSN was
25 and the median number of unique third-party domains
contacted at least once per OSN session was 12. Even Orkut,
which is shown using none of the top third-party domains
in Table 4 is part of the Google network of domains.
To understand the signicance of these third-party domains
in making associations not only between OSNs, but
also with traditionalWeb sites, we re-ran our study of roughly
1000 popular URLs from [11] in February 2008. We used the
batch-mode feature of Pagestats and gathered results from
967 URLs. The third-party domain results of this updated
study for popular Web sites show over a 30% increase in
the penetration of the top-10 third-party domains amongst
popular Web sites relative to April 2006 results in [11]. Particularly
noteworthy for this work is that the third-party
domains listed in Table 4 are all in the top-10 third-party
domains for popular Web sites.
The use of third-party domains with the capability to
track user activity is pervasive for OSNs even as it continues
to grow for traditional Web sites. This trend is of particular
concern as OSN users being tracked have explicitly identi-
ed themselves by logging into the OSN and provided the
OSN with personal information.