Sensor network applications such as structural
health monitoring require information about
the locations of sensors in order to make
meaningful use of the collected data. In order
to fully realize the benefits of ad hoc deployment
and provide scalable installation of
sensors, it is useful to have the sensor nodes
which automatically determine their locations.
We have developed two different localization
algorithms, and are currently investigating a
third approach.
Most localization schemes are based
on the concept of measuring distances from a
small number of surveyed “anchor” locations
and performing triangulation. Perhaps the
most straightforward distance measurement
approach is to measure the time it takes for a
sound (or ultra-sound) wave to propagate
from an anchor to a sensor node. We have
developed a localization service based on this
concept using MICA-2 Motes in conjunction
with a custom loud speaker device for anchors.
Given sensor nodes placed 10cm above the
ground in an outdoor parking lot environment
free of obstructions, sensors are able to measure
their distance from anchors to within
20cm at a distance of up to 28m. Using this
acoustic ranging technique in conjunction
with gradient descent triangulation computed
on the sensor nodes results in a typical node
localization error of 30-40cm.
The primary drawback to direct acoustic
distance measurement from anchors is that
all sensors must be within range of at least
three anchor nodes. In order to mitigate this
problem, researchers have developed multihop
localization systems. For example, the
Ad Hoc Positioning System (APS: Niculescu
& Nath 2001) counts the minimum number of
radio hops required for a sensor to communicate
with an anchor node as an estimate of the
true distance to that anchor. Various techniques
may be used to normalize these
distance estimates, such as considering the
ratio of hops to true distance between different
anchor nodes.
The above localization schemes require
surveyed anchor locations in order to
function. We have developed a proximity
matrix technique which is able to construct a
polar coordinate system and assign locations
to nodes without any explicit anchor information
(Figure 2); when anchors are available,
they can be used to improve results. Each
sensor examines which of its neighbors can
communicate with each other in order to
determine their relative positions. Starting
from some arbitrary origin sensor node, this
relative position information is used to assign
the θ-coordinate angle to each sensor node.
As in APS, the number of radio hops from a
sensor to the origin is used as an estimate of
the r-coordinate.
We are now examining methods to
take advantage of known structure to improve
localization results. For example, if a number
of sensors are laid out along a beam, we
expect that the localized positions should
form a long, rectangular shape. Thus we can
pre-program different sets of sensors with
different group ids, and then deploy sensors
from the same group along a given beam, and
from different groups along adjacent beams.
When performing localization, initially sensors
localize within their group, taking
advantage of the expected shape of the region,
and then the groups themselves are localized
with respect to each other and anchor nodes.