For a shared cache, there can be multiple clients (each
with data requirements specified in a profile) competing to
influence the contents of the cache. The profile processing
algorithms described in the previous sections all assume a
single profile as input, and therefore must be adapted to determine
the contents of a shared cache. One way to accomplish
this is to merge ? profiles into one superprofile that is
representative of them all. This would require first normalizing
individual profiles so that utility values are comparable
between profiles. There are many statistical techniques
that can be used to normalize utility values (e.g., z-scores
[18]), and therefore we assume that profiles have already
been normalized for the purpose of this discussion.
In merging individual normalized profiles, we assume
that the value of an object that is of interest to multiple
clients is the sum of values it takes in those clients’ profiles.
5 This means that a superprofile can be constructed
simply by appending the domain and utility equations of
the individual profiles that comprise it. The value of a given
object, then, would be the sum of all values it takes from
utility equations in the superprofiles. This approach nicely
handles the case where two profiles define domains that are
either equal or intersecting, but that are named or defined
differently. For example, if a profile expresses interest in
Truck Rental web sites, then the Hertz web page containing
information about renting cars and trucks would have a
utility value which is the sum of values it takes in this profile
and the Traveler profile (according to domain, RC)
for any superprofile that combines them. The downside to
this approach is the size of the superprofile that results - especially
when the number of client profiles from which it
is built is very large. We explore how well cache prefetching
algorithms scale to handle superprofiles (and comprably
scaled candidate object sets and cache sizes) in Section 4.4.
