Given the Fjord and CACQ environments for accessing and efficiently processing sensor data, applications
demonstrating their usefulness are needed. As an example of such an application, I built a visualization of
traffic in the Bay area. This visualization shows data from eight traffic sensors deployed on the freeway near UC
Berkeley and visually correlates that data with reports of traffic accidents from the California Highway Patrol
(CHP), web-cams available from news sites, and road locations and maps available from the US Census Bureau.
As another example of a visualization environment, Figure 4 shows a screenshot of the user interface for
querying this small subset of traffic data. The leftmost panel contains a map of the Bay Area, with the East Bay,
near Berkeley, on the right side of the bay. Squares up and down the freeway near Berkeley – which are not
visible in a grayscale reproduction so they are labeled with arrows – represent the current state of traffic sensors
for which we have data. Police-car icons represent traffic incidents the CHP has reported. On the right hand side
are graphs of speed and flow which display historical trends in traffic conditions. The slider along the top shows
the current time range which is being queried. A write-up on the traffic visualization system is available on-line
[26].
Figure 5 shows a simulation of a sensor network built to model the behavior of a network of sensors arranged
in a multi-hop topology for computing aggregate queries (see Section 3) below. This visualization facilitates
rapid prototyping and debugging of networking algorithms by showing connectivity, data flow, and various
network parameters, either as a color-coded “intensity” overlaid on the topology, or as a scatter plot (or both).
Figure 5 color codes sensors with their distance from the root (middle) of the network, with lighter nodes being
closer. Arrows underneath the cursor, which is currently at the center of the graph, show children, neighbors, and
parents (all nodes adjacent to the root are children.) The textual status at the bottom gives numeric information
about the sensor under the cursor. The line plot shows the historical average aggregates as computed at several
nodes in the network.