Intuitively, one can imagine that taking into account the sizes of the various dimensions
of a pattern should help to identify more relevant error-tolerant ones. Yet our
definition of a closed ET-n-set is based on absolute parameters and not relative ones.
This section will actually conclude on the significant issues raised by a relative tolerance
to noise, hence our choice of an absolute one. Nevertheless, let us first show that
our closed ET-n-set extractor, named Fenster, can be adapted to enumerate patterns
with a relative tolerance to noise. This adaptation restricts the pattern search space
to a region where a chosen relative tolerance to noise can be converted into an absolute
one. This restriction is possible and efficient because Fenster can enforce any
piecewise (anti)-monotone constraint along the extraction (search space pruning). A
constraint simply is a predicate taking in argument an n-set, i. e., every dimension of a
pattern. That constraint complements Definition 7, i. e., it defines additional properties
the closed ET-n-sets must have. A constraint is piecewise (anti)-monotone if fixing all
occurrences of all variables but one (occurrence) always provides a constraint that is
monotone (if the constraint is satisfied and the free occurrence grows, w.r.t. ?, then
it keeps on being satisfied) or anti-monotone (if the constraint is violated and the free
occurrence grows, w.r.t. ?, then it keeps on being violated) Cerf et al. (2009a).
Many popular constraints deal with the “geometry” of the patterns, i. e., disregard
the actual elements in it and only consider the cardinalities of its dimensions: the
famous minimal size constraint forces one of the dimension to contain at least μ ? N
elements (where μ is a parameter fixed by the analyst), the minimal area constraint
forces the product of the dimension sizes to exceed a threshold ν ? N, etc.Ann-dimensional
Cartesian coordinate system allows to depict the pattern selection imposed by
such a constraint. The coordinates of a pattern are its numbers of elements in each
attribute domain of the n-ary relation. For instance, a pattern (X1, X2) ? 2D1 × 2D2
in a binary relationR ? D1×D2 is represented by the point (|X1|, |X2|) in the Cartesian
plane. The patterns satisfying a minimal area constraint relate to points above the
curve whose equation is xy = ν (ν ? N being theminimal area chosen by the analyst).
A specific piecewise (anti)-monotone constraint allows to force the “geometry” of
a pattern to be in a region of the n-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system where its
absolute tolerance to noise corresponds to a relative one. In other words, instead of an
absolute tolerance to noise, the analyst can specify a relative one (ri )i=1..n ? [0, 1]n
and a region of interest. The relative parametrization is converted into the corresponding
absolute one (parameters (i )i=1..n ? Nn) and Fenster extracts the desired closed
ET-n-sets in the chosen region. Here is the constraint defining such a region:
The proof of the piecewise (anti)-monotonicity of Cin-region-of-interest is based on, first,
splitting the double inequalities, then, showing that the left ones are anti-monotone
and the right ones monotone.
The regions of interest derive from the relative parameters (ri )i=1..n and it is easy
to compute the absolute parameters (i )i=1..n matching, in a given region, the desired
patterns. Figure 1 depicts these regions in the case of a binary relation, i. e., it plots
their contour lines in the Cartesian plane whose coordinate system was described earlier.
The couple of integers inside a region are the absolute parameters Fenster uses.
When n ? 3, analog regions can be drawn in the n-dimensional coordinate system
(|X1|, . . . , |Xn|) but they are not rectangular anymore.
If the analyst is interested in (relatively defined) closed ET-n-sets scattered across
several regions, Fenster has to be run several times. Each run is performed under
the constraint Cin-region-of-interest corresponding to the region and with the associated
absolute tolerance to noise. The union of the closed ET-n-sets listed at each run is the
collection the analyst queried. Because the regions do not overlap, this union actually is
a concatenation, i. e., every desired pattern is discovered only once. Nevertheless, there
may be patterns that are included into each other (according to ). This is expected
with a relative tolerance to noise: there may exist a small pattern tolerating about the
same proportion of noise as a larger one. The larger one would encompass a greater
absolute quantity of noise on at least one of its elements. Only keeping the largest
patterns (i. e., those that are not including in another output pattern) does not provide
a lossless condensation of all patterns. In other terms, given an n-set tolerating proportions
of noise, some sub-patterns of it (according to ) gather greater proportions
of noise. That is why the closed ET-itemset miners, tolerating proportions of noise, do
not enforce a closedness constraint and extract huge collections of redundant patterns.
To the best of our knowledge, the only exception to this rule is AC-Close (Cheng
et al. 2008) and the closed patterns it outputs are not a lossless condensation of all
(closed and unclosed) patterns.
By complementing Definition 7 with Cin-region-of-interest, Fenster discovers patterns
that are closed in the region. However, this closedness is not lossless either. To avoid
this issue, all ET-n-sets, tolerating noise in a relative way, could be enumerated. In
other terms, Cin-region-of-interest would only complement Definition 9.As a consequence,
the algorithm detailed in the next section would be simpler (no need of for the S n-set).
Its execution would require far more time though. Indeed, no closedness constraint
means far more patterns to list. Anyway, with or without the closedness constraint, a
relative tolerance to noise entails significantly increased time requirements (in comparison
with an absolute tolerance to noise). Indeed, it offers far less opportunities of
search space pruning. When defined in an absoluteway (as inDefinition 9), C-connected
is anti-monotone, i. e., it allows the extractor to ignore the super-patterns of any n-set
exceeding the authorized i absent n-tuples per element. Indeed, the violated absolute
thresholds are violated as well by the larger patterns. In the same situation (enumeration
of a pattern violating the -connectedness) but with relative noise-tolerance
thresholds, the extractor often has to enumerate these super-patterns. Like the state
of the Art, it takes Fenster far more time to list patterns tolerating proportions of
noise in a large number of regions of interest (hence, many extractions) than patterns
tolerating a comparable amount of noise but in an absolute way.
Both the absence of a lossless condensation of the patterns (hence, much redundant
patterns) and the absence of an anti-monotone connectedness constraint (hence,
the practical impossibility to mine large datasets) justify our choice to mine n-sets
tolerating absolute quantities of noise.