Users are generally unaware of who has access to their
private information on OSNs. Interestingly, most users may
be able to carry out a large fraction of their actions on OSNs
while signicantly shrinking the amount of private information
that is made available to others. Most of the thousands
of popular applications on OSNs like Facebook do not need
complete access to the private information of users, yet Facebook
gives users no choice if they want to download and use
an externally created application. For example, it is hard to
justify the use of information other than the list of friends
is required to run popular applications such as Scrabulous.
We need a way to enumerate the precise private bits of information
that are actually needed for a user to interact with
and make full use of the myriad features of a OSN. While the
privacy bits may vary with a specic feature (some external
applications may genuinely need more information than others),
we can do much better than the current all or nothing
approach. Limiting access to just friends or those in a network
is not ne-grained enough. We could start bottom-up
and hand out information to more and more users/networks
based on need. Just as there are groups, networks, etc. as
aggregating mechanisms there should be a way to deny private
information at each aggregation. It should be possible
to both deny and enable access to private information at the
same level of granularity.
OSNs must clearly indicate the bare minimum of private
information needed for a particular set of interactions. If
an external application requires access to list of friends and
nothing else, then the default should be that bare minimum.
If additional features of the application require access to
other bits of private information then access to the supremum
of the information could be enabled, and no more.
A mechanism to identify the metrics bare minimum and
supremum would be a useful addition to the privacy arsenal.
Such metrics would allow us to compare various OSNs on an
equal footing and let the users decide how comfortable they
are with the privacy information that is being shared. Our
enumeration of privacy groups in Section 2 and the left-toright
ordering of privacy groups in Figure 1 is a rst step
in this direction. A user could have a threshold mark along
this spectrum in terms of what groups (and thus what bits)
they are willing to share freely. For each set of interactions
or use of an application, the OSN could indicate what bits
are needed and if they are to the right of the user's threshold,
access is provided transparently. If some additional bits
to the left of the user's threshold are essential then the user
can be prompted. The user can allow or disallow, and optionally
set the duration (for current session, forever etc.)
for such a grant. There are several browser extensions that
are already capable of providing functionality similar to this
in other, related arenas such as security and script execution
privileges. It would be relatively easy to create an extension
that can be used with OSNs.