Caching of query results has two benefits: it can be used to re-
duce response times by bringing the data close to the queries, and
it can be used to off-load work from the sites that own popular data
to less loaded sites (auto-tuning). Figure 10 shows how caching
can help in increasing overall throughput of the system by offloading
work. We use the fourth architecture and show results without
caching, with caching but no hits (this demonstrates the overheads
of caching), with caching and 50% hits, and finally, with caching
and 100% hits. As we can see, caching induces minimal overhead
in the system. Caching does not affect the throughputs for type
1 and type 2 in this scenario because these queries are always directed
to the machine that has the full data. On the other hand, for
type 3 and type 4 queries, we see that as the probability of hits increases,
the overall throughput of the system reduces significantly.
This happens because after the initial few queries, all the queries
are completely answered by the top-level sites (sites that are assigned
to the city and county nodes), and these nodes become the
bottleneck. As we will see in Section 5.6, the time taken to forward
a query to another node is much less than the time taken to process
the query when the answer is present at a node. This suggests
the need for bypassing the cache under heavy load imbalance. On
the other hand, caching improves throughput by up to 33% for the
more realistic mixed workload, because the otherwise idle top-level
sites can absorb some of the load from the lower-level sites.
The effects of caching are more pronounced in terms of latency.
Unfortunately, because we are not using a wide area network in
our experiments, it is hard to see these effects in our experiments.
Figure 11 shows the average latencies for the five workloads under
different caching scenarios as discussed above. Even in the case
of near-zero network latencies, we can see that query latencies are
reduced by 10–33% for type 3 and type 4 queries, and for the mixed
workload.