Figure 1 shows dierent bits of privacy information of
varying types associated with user accounts. While terminology
varies across OSN sites, such privacy bits are generally
grouped to set privacy controls as follows:
Thumbnail A brief prole containing privacy bits with at
least a user name (rst and at times last name), and photo.
A thumbnail is often the least private user information in
an OSN.
Greater Prole This group has additional information: interests,
relationships and other bits that a user is willing to
provide. Protection settings for these additional bits of a
user prole typically are through a separate privacy setting.
List of Friends The list of friends of a user where friendship
requires agreement by the befriended user. Although
a specic piece of information, this is often its own group
with its own privacy setting.
User Generated Content Content added by the user such
as photos, videos, comments and links. Not all OSNs provide
separate privacy settings for controlling this group.
Comments Status updates, comments, testimonials and
tags about the user or user content.
Although we have enumerated ve groups above, it is
conceivable that these may be teased apart into additional
groups or merged into fewer groups. Coarser the granularity
the harder it is to provide tailored privacy control.
OSN sites typically grant privileges to view these groups of
information to three entities: the user, the user's friends or
to all users. For example, for User 1 in Figure 1 the privacy
groups from left to right could correspond to a group of bits
only viewable by the user, followed by three groups viewable
to the user's friends and a group viewable by all users.
Some sites dene an additional access level that includes
more users than friends, but not all users of the site. For
example, Facebook allows viewing privileges to be granted to
the members of a user's networks, which include geographic
regions, schools, and work. MySpace allows viewing to be
granted for users 18 years or older. Bebo allows viewing of
information for a user-dened age range. Orkut, Friendster
and Facebook (recently added) allow viewing privileges to
be assigned to friends of friends. Separate from these privileges
assigned to a party of users, many OSNs also allow
them to be denied to specic users.
As an example, Table 1 shows the allowable privacy settings
for viewing dierent privacy bit groups in Facebook
and MySpace. We study how these settings are used in
practice in Section 3. A \" indicates that it is possible to
allow the given party to view the information in the privacy
bit group while a \-" is used to indicate that it is not possible.
So Table 1 shows the additional privacy bits that are
part of a Facebook user's Greater Prole (referred to simply
as Prole in Facebook) can be set to be viewable by the
user's friends, friends of friends, or set to the user's friends
and users in the same network. Note that user generated
content is also included in this group for Facebook. It is not
possible to grant this privilege to all users nor restrict it to
only oneself. A box around an option
indicates the
default value for a setting. Thus, \friends+networks" is the
default Facebook setting for viewing a user's greater profile.
The privacy settings in Table 1 show that the networks
concept is important to privacy control for Facebook. By
default, information in a user's prole/content, and comments
(as on a user's \Wall") are viewable by any other
user in the user's networks. Facebook also allows a user to
designate a primary network and limit access to information
for friends and users in the primary network. Facebook provides
some controls on who can join a school network (via
age claims and needing to be befriended by someone in that
school network), college and work networks (via email address
in those domains), but there is no control on who may
join a regional network. In addition, the thumbnail prole
and list of friends for all Facebook users is publicly available
to all other Facebook users. As shown in Table 1 all of these
settings can be changed via the Facebook interface, but the
default settings allow any user to gain access to all information
about another user on Facebook. Columns to the right
of the double vertical line are particularly problematic for
privacy as these are situations where a user is not able to
control which users are able to view the given information.
The only exception is that Facebook imposes age restrictions
that are not explicitly documented on their Web site, but
we have observed it and it has been reported [15]. These
restrictions prohibit users over 18 years of age from viewing
proles of users under age 18 and vice-versa, unless the users
are friends. However, these restrictions do not hide a user's
list of friends from other users across this age divide.
Table 1 shows that MySpace uses similar permissive defaults
in terms of access to a user's information|all users
have access to all other user's information. There is no
way to even limit the visibility of a user's thumbnail pro-
le. MySpace uses coarse-grained privacy controls where a
single setting controls access rights for all other rows in Table
1|in terms of Figure 1 all privacy bits other than the
thumbnail are combined in the same privacy bit group. The
range and coarseness of privacy controls for Bebo are the
same as MySpace except that instead of xing the age limit
of 18, Bebo users can specify an age range to use as a level
for granting access. In addition, Friendster, Hi5, and Xanga
are similar except they do not have an extra access level.
Imeem and LiveJournal allow a user's prole to always be
viewable by all users. Twitter has a single privacy setting
to control which decides who can see their status updates,
location, or biographical information. Digg allows viewing
of some bits in the prole and comments to a user to be controlled.
Orkut actually restricts the default settings for some
parts of the greater prole to be only viewable by friends.
In summary, the privacy groups for OSNs are large with
many bits controlled with a single setting, OSNs do not
provide any range of privacy settings for some of the privacy
groups, and all OSNs have permissive default settings that
allow viewing privileges to more users than just friends. The
end result is that by default a user does not control who
has access to their information on these sites unless they
explicitly control their privacy settings.