When it comes to n-ary relations, Data- Peeler (Cerf et al. 2009a) extracts every
exact closed n-set whatever the arity n ? 2. Fenster reuses some of Data- Peeler’s
enumeration principles. However, the fundamental implementation issues pertaining
to the enforcement of the newly defined constraints C-connected and C-closed and the
wiser choice of the element to enumerate at every recursive call make Fenster differ
a lot from Data- Peeler. The other proposals for exact closed set discovery in
the specific and simpler cases of binary and ternary relations are not discussed here
(see Cerf et al. (2009a) for such a discussion). Sim et al. (2011) have recently proposed
CGQBminer to completely list noise tolerant closed sets in ternary relations
seen as collections of bi-partite graphs. These patterns were baptized maximal crossgraph
quasi-bicliques by analogy with maximal cross-graph quasi-cliques. Indeed, the
underlying noise tolerance is similar (see Sect. 7.4): in every bi-partite graph involved
in the pattern, every vertex of a quasi-biclique is mostly connected with the others
vertices. The dimension gathering graph labels plays a particular role in this definition
of noise tolerance. Furthermore, the constraints it imposes on the patterns are quite
numerous (one per couple (vertex,bi-partite graph) in the pattern).
DCE (Georgii et al. 2009, 2011) extracts, from real-valued tensors, every dense
n-set. The constraint “having a density greater than α ? R” relies on the mean of
the values covered by a pattern. Such a definition suffers from a relevance problem,
which is empirically pointed out in Sect. 5.2: an element can be part of a pattern but
disconnected or very weakly connected with the other attributes of the pattern. That is
why the authors also define balanced clusters in a way that is similar to ET-n-set (balanced
clusters tolerate noise in a relative way though) but show that their framework
cannot prune the search space with such a definition (DCE’s per-element tolerance
to noise is enforced in a post-process). Indeed, DCE exploits the (generalized) loose
anti-monotonicity (Bonchi and Lucchese 2005) of the density constraint and a reverse
search paradigm (Avis and Fukuda 1996): given a dense n-set, there exists a “subpattern”
with one element less that is dense. This element, from any attribute domain
(hence, the “generalization”), relates to the hyperplane of the pattern with the smallest
sum of the real values it contains. Thus, DCE is depth-first and, at every recursive
call, enumerates n-sets with such an additional element. In this way, every candidate
pattern is traversed once, the minimal density constraint becomes anti-monotone on
any enumeration branch and prunes the search space. In this respect, it is alike what
Uno (2007) does to list quasi-cliques. These enumerations principles, originating from
the choice of a relative tolerance to noise, do not allow the same efficiency results as
Fenster, which ends up running orders of magnitude faster (see Sect. 5.4).Moreover,
this same choice of a relative tolerance to noise makes a closedness constraint not
provide a lossless condensation of the dense n-sets. Without it, the size of the output
collections is problematic (see Sect. 5.3).