A powerful paradigm in sensor network design has emerged
recently: Give users a declarative query interface to the sensor
data, thereby abstracting away the physical properties of the
network when tasking the sensors. Such a sensor database
system sends event data from source nodes to selected storage
nodes called view nodes where the data is collected for further
processing. Many such sensor networks have strong constraints
on their energy usage to maximize network lifetime. A significant
amount of energy can be preserved by (1) carefully
determining the data that should be stored in designated view
nodes, and (2) coordinating the data dissemination to these
nodes.
In this paper we overview several ongoing research directions.
Our first direction is view selection. In order to minimize
the number of messages for a given query workload, we
introduce a hybrid pull-push model, in which relevant data
is collected at sensor nodes and pushed to view nodes, from
where the data can be pulled when queries are issued. Our goal
is to decide, given a query workload, what data we should store
and where in the network this data should be stored in order
to minimize the expected overall query cost.
A second, related research direction is aggregation tree
selection. Processing an aggregation query requires that data
from a set of sensor nodes be routed to the site where the
query was posed, with in-network aggregation on the route.
The most natural way is along edges of a spanning tree that
in some sense “embeds” the query plan. The feasibility and
cost benefit of a set of views – our first research direction –
depends in subtle ways on the choice of the routing tree.
Our third research direction is wave scheduling.We propose
to schedule transmissions among nodes such that data flows
quickly from event sources to storage nodes while avoiding
collisions at the MAC layer. Since all nodes adhere to the
schedule, most nodes can be turned off and only wake up during
well-defined time intervals, resulting in significant energy
savings. We show how routing protocols can be modified to
interact symbiotically with the scheduling decisions, resulting
in significant energy savings at the cost of higher latency.
In the remainder of the paper, we first introduce our model
of a sensor network (Section II), we then overview ongoing
work on view selection (Section III), selecting data dissemination
trees (Section IV), and wave scheduling (Section V).