Introduction
Recent advances in data collection and storage technology
have made it possible for many companies to keep large
amounts of data relating to their business online. At the
same time, cheap computing power has also made some
automatic analysis of this data feasible. This activity is
commonly referred to as data mining.
One major application domain of data mining is
in the analysis of transactional data. It is assumed
that the database system records information about user
transactions, where each transaction is a collection of
items. In this setting, association rules capture interrelationships
between various items. An association
rule captures the notion of a set of items occurring together
in transactions. For example, in a database maintained
by a supermarket, an association rule might be of
the form “beer

chips (support: 3%, confidence: 87%)”,
which means that 3% of all database transactions contain
the items beer and chips, and 87% of the transactions that
have the item “beer” also have the item “chips” in them.
The two percentage parameters above are commonly referred
to as “support” and “confidence” respectively.
Typically, the data mining process is controlled by a
user who sets minimum thresholds for the support and confidence
parameters. The user might also impose other restrictions,
like restricting the search space of items, in order
to guide the data mining process.
Following the pioneering work of [AIS93], discovery
of association rules has been extensively studied in [AS94,
SA95, HF95, SON95, PCY95, SA96, FMMT96, Toi96].
However, all the above work treat all the data as one large
segment, with no attention paid to segmenting the data over
different time intervals. To illustrate, let us return to our
previous example. It may be the case that beer and chips are
sold together primarily between 6PM and 9PM. Therefore,
if we segment the data over the intervals 7AM–6PM and
6PM–9PM, we may find that the support for the beer and
chips rule jumps to 50%.
From the above example we can conclude that although
an association rule may have the user specified minimum
confidence and support within the entire time spectrum,
analysis of the data in finer time granularity may reveal that
the association rule exists only in certain time intervals,
and does not occur in the remaining time intervals. Even
casual observation of many association rules over monthly
data may disclose seasonal variation where peaks occur at
approximately the same month in each year. Association
rules could also display regular hourly, daily, weekly, etc.,
variation that has the appearance of cycles. It is also possible
that an association rule does not have the user specified
minimum confidence and/or support over the entire
time spectrum, but its confidence and support are above the
minimum threshold within certain time intervals. If these
time intervals display a periodicity, discovering these rules
and their periodicities may reveal interesting information
that can be used for prediction and decision making.
Let us nowexamine another supermarket example where
we are analyzing sales data over several months. Assume
that we are interested in the selling patterns of the items coffee
and doughnuts. If we were to look at the overall support
for coffee and doughnuts occurring together in transactions,
we might discover that the two items do not have enough
support (i.e., these items do not meet the minimum thresh-
old for support specified by the user). However, if we look
into hourly sales figures, we might discover that coffee and
doughnuts have a strong tendency to occur together with
high support during the time interval 7AM–9AM! That is,
“coffee

doughnuts” during the interval 7AM–9AM every
day. Further analysis might also reveal a larger weekly
tendency wherein coffee and doughnut sales dip during
weekends.
Discovering such regularities in the behavior of association
rules over time are the subject of this paper. We
believe that our techniques will enable marketers to better
identify trends in sales and allow for better forecasting of
future demand.
We assume in this paper that the transactional data to be
analyzed is time-stamped and that time intervals are specified
by the user to divide the data into disjoint segments.
We believe that users will typically opt for “natural” segmentations
of the data based on months, weeks, days, etc.,
and that users are best qualified to make this decision based
on their understanding of the underlying data. Addressing
issues like overlapping and/or hierarchical segmentations,
and automatically determining a good segmentation are
outside the scope of this paper.
We refer to an association rule as cyclic if the rule has
the minimum confidence and support at regular time intervals.
Such a rule need not hold for the entire transactional
database, but rather only for transactional data in a particular
periodic time interval. That is, each cyclic rule
must have the user specified minimum support and confidence
over a specific periodic time interval. Upper and
lower bounds for the periods of such time intervals will be
specified by the user. We define the problem of mining
cyclic association rules as the generation of all the cycles
of association rules. Given a large database consisting of
transactional information, where each transaction consists
of a transaction-id, a set of items and a time-stamp, our
goal is to provide efficient algorithms to discover cyclic
association rules.
We first consider a relatively straightforward extension
of existing association rule mining techniques for solving
this problem. This extension treats association rules and
cycles independently. It applies one of the existing methods
for discovering association rules to each segment of
data and then applies pattern matching algorithms to detect
cycles in association rules. By studying the interaction between
cycles and association rule mining more closely, we
identify techniques called cycle pruning and cycle skipping
which allowus to significantly reduce the amount of wasted
work performed during the data mining process. We then
show the effectiveness of these techniques by presenting
the results of a series of experiments.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
In the next section, we define the problem of discovering
cyclic association rules formally. In Section 3, we discuss
the shortcomings of the existing techniques to discover
cyclic association rules and present two new techniques to
solve this problem. Implementation details of our prototype
are described in Section 4. The experimental evaluation of
the two techniques is presented in Section 5. Finally, we
present our conclusions in Section 6 and identify directions
for future research.