Given a binary sequence of length

and the maximum
cycle length of interest
 
the running time of detecting
all cycles with lengths less than or equal to

of the
binary sequence has an upper bound of
  
operations.
We now present a straight-forward approach to
detecting cycles. This approach is composed of two steps.
Initially, the set of candidate cycles contains all possible
cycles. In the first step, the sequence is scanned, and each
time a zero is encountered at a sequence position , candidate
cycles   mod  
, 1

  
  are eliminated from
the set of candidate cycles. The first step completes whenever
the last bit of the sequence is scanned or the set of
candidate cycles becomes empty, which ever is first. In the
second step, large cycles (i.e., cycles that are not multiples
of any existing cycles are detected). A straigt-forward approach
to eliminating cycles that are not large is as follows.
Starting from the shortest cycle, for each cycle
eliminate each other cycle 
from the set of cycles,
if is a multiple of	
holds.
The sequential algorithm uses this approach to detect the
cycles.
However, if we knew initially or at any time while we
are scanning the sequence that some of the cycles cannot
exist in the sequence (e.g., due to cycle-pruning or cycleelimination),
cycle detection procedure can be optimized by
skipping sequence positions that cannot be part of any of the
candidate cycles. That is, instead of scanning the sequence
sequentially, we can skip the bit positions that are not part
of the candidate cycles (i.e., cycle-skipping). For example,
if

is three, and we know initially that 01, 010 and 001
cannot be cycles of a given sequence (e.g., due to cyclepruning),
then we don’t need scan bit positions 1, 5, 7, 11,
etc. Also, while we are scanning the sequence, if we also
eliminate candidate cycle 100 (i.e., cycle-elimination), we
can skip scanning every second bit of the sequence starting
at that point. The interleaved algorithm employees these
optimization techniques (cycle-pruning, cycle-elimination
and cycle-skipping) that reduce the overhead of cycle detection,
but more importantly, the overhead of calculating
support for itemsets, since the interleaved algorithm “interleaves”
both cycle detection and support calculation for
itemsets.
The cycle detection process can be further optimized by
considering a candidate cycle	
only when there
is no other candidate cycle 
remaining such that
	
is a multiple of
"
(i.e.,divides and	mod).
Further optimizations of the cycle detection is not in the
scope of this paper. However, given a sequence of length
#
and the maximum cycle length of interest
 
the
complexity of finding all the cycles of the sequence is an
open problem.