Due to time and cost factors, simulation is an
attractive alternative to experimental deployment
of wireless sensor network applications
in development. While several sensor network
simulators are currently available, they
tend to emphasize one or the other specific
aspect while neglecting others. SensorSim
(Park et al. 2000) and SensorSimII (Ulmer
2000) are predominantly network simulators;
TOSSIM (Levis et al. 2003) and TOSSF (Perrone
& Nicol 2002) simulate MICA sensor
nodes; Siesta (Ledeczi et al. 2001) and Em-
Star (Elson et al. 2003) focus on applications.
To overcome limitations of the above
simulators and aid in prototyping and assessing
services such as those discussed above,
we are developing a flexible sensor network
simulator. Our simulator contains a suite of
interchangeable and customizable components
which model applications, network
communication, and the physical environment
(Figure 4). Simulated sensor nodes run the
same source code as is deployed on actual
sensor nodes, and include diagnostic facilities
such as power utilization analysis. Different
network components offer varying degrees of
realism, ranging from immediate guaranteed
delivery to lossy wireless channels with bitlevel
collision calculation. Users can assemble
application-specific environments from
interchangeable tiles representing regions of
concrete, grass and walls, which have different
signal propagation characteristics. Note
that simulation is very fast: e.g., we have
simulated an 8192-node acoustic localization
scenario at a rate of only 12 real seconds for
1000 simulated seconds on an ordinary PC.
We are now looking into integrating
structural simulation as an environment component
into our sensor network simulator.
This feature will allow structural health monitoring
applications to be simulated on a
realistic model of a large-scale sensor network.
Since it is much easier to change the capabilities
of simulated sensor nodes than real ones,
researchers will be able to determine what
capabilities are necessary for distributed
structural health monitoring rather than being
restricted to the platforms available today.