Common Parameters: Table 2 gives the parameter settings
that were constant for the unshared cache, NCP and
PCP experiments we present in Section 4.2 and 4.3. We
fixed the cache size to be 64 MB, as this is a typical memory
size for current PDA’s: the most obvious choice of device
for data recharging. Each experiment ran over 96 randomly
generated profiles (as described below), and each of
these profiles included 20 domain definitions and accompanying
utility equations. Every experiment assumed a candidate
object set consisting of roughly 12800 objects (and
distributed in size as specified in the table).6 The size distribution
was determined by downloading the 50 most popular
web site homepages (including images and any necessary
files for correct display) as rated by Media Metrix [17] for
December 2001. We divided the range of sizes for these
pages into five equally sized intervals, and for each interval
calculated the average homepage size as well as the percentage
of homepages that fell in that interval. The cardinality
of the candidate object was set so that each domain set in
the profile was represented and assigned an equal number
of objects that fit the distribution shown in Table 2. The total
size of all objects for each domain exceeded the size of
cache, so that algorithms were free to choose objects based
on their policy rather than object availability. Given the average
size of objects of 104 KB, this amounted to a candidate
set cardinality of about 12800.
Random Profile Generation: For these experiments, 96
monotonic profiles were randomly generated, each with 20
domains and 20 utility equations. For each profile, 20% of
its utility equations are flat (i.e., of the form U (A) = k)
and 80% are non-flat equations, which have the form,
Non-flat utility equations subsume utility equations with no
dependencies (A could be set to be 0) as well as utility equations
with no thresholds ( could also be set to be 0).7
The values of A, ,  and 
 in non-flat utility equations
determine how objects of a given domain type change in
value as more get added to a cache, as categorized below:
Immediate vs Delayed Gratification: The value of A determines
how quickly A objects acquire value as B objects get
added to a cache. If A is very small (e.g., 0 or 1), the utility
equation for A objects exhibits immediate gratification,
whereas larger values of A (e.g., 10-15% of the size of the
cache) result in utility equations with delayed gratification.
Appreciating vs Depreciating: The relative values of  and

 determine whether or not the value of an A object tends
to appreciate or depreciate in value as the cache contains
more objects. If EE E , the utility equation for A objects
is depreciating. If E3E E  , the utility equation is appreciating.
An appreciating utility equation might be used to give
value to an object that gains importance as it becomes part
of a larger collection, such as emails reporting system problems
(several reports of the same problem suggest that the
problem is system-wide).
Quickly vs. Slowly Accelerating: Finally, the value of  indicates
whether a utility equation appreciates/depreciates in
value quickly or slowly. If  is very small (e.g., 1), the utility
equation for A is quickly accelerating. If  is large (e.g.,
50), then the utility equation for A is slowly accelerating.
The 96 randomly generated profiles fall into 24 different
profile “classes” of 4 profiles each, with each class distin-
guished by their preset values for ,  and in their non-
flatequations. Specifically, for any given class,  is fixed
to be either or is fixed to be either or  and 
and are fixed to be randomly generated numbers between
and  such that  is eithe  or .
