Non-Preemptive Cache Prefetching (NCP) uses profiles
to determine how to prefetch caches to achieve maximum
utility value. Assume for any profile $, that its value function
%'& , maps any set of objects (i.e., a cache) to its value
according to . Then the Non-Preemptive Cache Prefetching
problem (NCP) is defined as follows:
Definition 3.1 (NCP) Given a finite set of objects (“candi-
date object set”) such that is the
size of object , a profile , and a cache capacity  , deter-
mine subset, that satisfies the constraint,
and that maximizes .
NCP is a variation of the knapsack problem [20] where
an object’s size and utility is analagous to its weight and
value using classic terminology. Unlike the knapsack problem,
the value function for NCP () must map sets of objects
(rather than individual objects) to values because the
value of an individual object can vary according to its context
(i.e., the other objects that have been put into the cache)
due to data dependencies and thresholds. We examined the
effectiveness of three standard optimization heuristics: a
greedy technique, a randomized technique (simulated annealing),
and branch-and-bound.
A Greedy Algorithm (GREEDY): The greedy algorithm
for NCP (GREEDY) selects one object at a time to add to a
cache, that adds the most value per byte to the cache of previously
chosen objects. In the case of ties, GREEDY selects
the smallest object. To demonstrate, consider the application
of GREEDY to the Traveler profile in the context of
data recharging. Suppose that the set of candidate objects,
is the set of equally-sized objects,
such that. are restaurant reviews,   and
  are rental car web pages, 5.a  and 5.a  are shuttle schedules,
d and d are directions to Downtown and a and are hotel web pages. For its first object, GREEDY wouald
choose a shuttle schedule (e.g., 5.a	) as this object adds
maximal value (3) to an empty cache. Then GREEDY would
choose a hotel web page (e.g., ag-E), as this object adds maximal
value (2) to a cache consisting only of a shuttle schedule.
GREEDY has a choice for the third chosen object, as
both restaurant reviews and directions add 1 to the existing
cache. If it chooses the latter, it will finish with the optimal
cache shown in Figure 3a. If it chooses the former, then
it will make the same choice with the same consequences
for its fourth object and therefore finish with a suboptimal
cache of value 9 (Figure 3b) or 8 (Figures 3c and 3d).
Simulated Annealing (SA): Simulated Annealing (SA) is
a randomized algorithm that statistically simulates the slow
cooling of a physical system [22]. The algorithm works by
choosing an initial state (the “current state”) within a state
space consisting of all possible solutions, and then performing
a random walk beginning at this state. The walk consists
of choosing a random neighbor, and proceeding to make
this neighbor the current state if it has greater value than the
current state, or with some non-zero probability that gradually
decreases over time. Applied to profile-driven cache
prefetching, states denote sets of candidate objects that together
can fit in the given cache. The value of a state is the
value of its associated set of objects according to the given
profile. A move in the state space corresponds to the act
of replacing objects in the associated set, with one or more
drawn from the candidate object set (that fit in the cache that
remains when the initial objects are removed).
The key parameters that affect the results of running simulated
annealing are the initial temperature, h , and the conditions
for decreasing the temperature. The latter can be
based on a timeout, or on a degree of convergence (i.e.,
stopping when the difference in value between a state and
its chosen neighbor is below some threshold). Because the
difference in value between one cache state and its neighbor
is likely to be relatively low (given that they will differ
in just a few out of several hundred objects), we based
changes in temperature on timeouts. We explored three different
choices of initial temperature and timeouts, each of
which required SA to run for roughly 5 minutes before settling
on a cache’s contents. Of these, we found the values
produced to be close to the same for all profiles, but that
setting the initial temperature to be 5, and the timeout to
be 1 minute worked best in most cases. Therefore, for our
experiments in Section 4, we run simulated annealing with
these temperature and timeout settings.
Branch-and-Bound (BnB): Branch-and-bound (BnB)
searches a tree of all possible solutions in a depth-first
manner, but selectively pruning the search tree whenever
it is determined that an unvisited subtree cannot possibly
contain a solution better than the best seen thus far. Applied
to profile-driven cache prefetching, every path from the
root to a leaf node in the search tree represents one possible
cache of objects chosen from the candidate object set. Each
node denotes a (domain, count) pair, MijkS, and every path
through that node represents a solution that includes the smallest objects in the candidate set that belong to domaink
i (and no others from domain, i ). Each level of the tree
contains only nodes for some given domain,
such that is the largest number of objects from  that
can fit in the cache. While searching this tree of solutions,
the branch-and-bound algorithm we implemented prunes an
unvisited subtree if all paths from the root to leaf nodes of
the subtree specify object sets that are guaranteed not to fit
in the cache. For example, let the set of domains defined for
a given profile be , and let the path from the
root to the current node in the search tree be
If the total size ofthe set consisting of the   smallest ob-
jects in , the smallest objects in , and so on up to the
su smallest objects in i u is larger than the cache capacity,
then there is no need to visit any of the nodes in any subtree
of (i u, su). A second pruning trick is based on cache value
bounds. Let i be any domain in the set,
Let be the maximum number of objects
from domain i that could fit in the cache containing the 
smallest objects of  i , the  smallest objects of etc. If
the value of the cache denoted by the path,
is less than the best cache value seen thus far, then the entire
subtree rooted at () can be pruned, as no cache
represented by a path emanating from this node can exceed
the value of the cache denoted by ? .
Given the size of the search tree involved for non-trivial
profiles (the number of nodes will be the product of the
number of objects that can fit in a cache for each domain),
branch-and-bound searching quickly becomes infeasible.
To make it feasible, we terminate searching after 10 minutes.
To increase the likelihood of an interrupted search
finding a good solution, we use a trick from [14] whereby
domains are sorted in the order generated by GREEDY, and
the search tree is constructed so that the highest level of the
tree contains nodes representing the most valuable domains.
The search is then conducted in a postorder, rather than preorder
traversal of the tree. This biases the search to favor
caches with more objects from more valuable domains.3