The default privacy settings for OSNs are permissive in allowing
strangers in an OSN to access user's information. We
now examine the extent to which users change their privacy
to more restrictive settings. A 2005 study found that only
1.2% of college Facebook users at CMU changed the searchability
of their thumbnail prole (rst row in Table 1) and
only 0.06% changed their prole visibility (second row) [7].
More recently, it was reported that 75% of 200 users in the
Facebook London regional network have their full prole
viewable by other users in the network [14].
We studied privacy settings for Facebook and MySpace,
the two dominant OSNs, as well as Bebo and Twitter for
which obtaining settings was available to us. A crawl carried
out for a dierent study [9] of over 67000 Twitter users found
that more than 99% had retained the default privacy setting
whereupon their name, list of followers, location, Web site,
and biographical information are visible.
For MySpace, we examined the percentage of users that
allowed their prole to be viewable|the default setting. A
user in MySpace is assigned a numeric userid that is used for
viewing their prole (both the thumbnail and greater portion).
We generated 5000 random numeric userids in an observed
range of valid userids and in February 2008 retrieved
their corresponding user proles. We obtained prole information
for 3851 valid userids, of which 79% (3046) of users
retained their default setting that their prole, friends, comments
and user content were viewable.
We studied Bebo likewise, but instead of random userids
we examined the proles of users who were members of interest
groups within Bebo. Again in February 2008, we found
80% of the Bebo users we examined allowed their prole,
friends, comments and user content to be viewable.
We took a dierent approach to study Facebook, using
its 506 regional networks (circa April 2008) that represent
geographical areas. We did this because Facebook restricts
public prole viewing to users in the same network and there
are fewer controls on who can join a regional network, although
a user can only be a member of one regional network
at a given time. In the U.S., the 272 regional networks
correspond to cities but often they include users who may
live nearby. Outside the U.S., the 234 regional networks
correspond to cities in Canada and U.K., but to countries
elsewhere. Table 2 shows the 20 U.S. and Table 3 the 18
non-U.S. regional networks studied during April 2008.
Our choice of regional networks was done to meet three
criteria: rst we wanted both large and small regional networks
in terms of number of users; second we sought some
degree of geographical diversity in the U.S.; and third we
tried for linguistic and cultural diversity in the non-U.S. regions.
We began with a four-part size-based separation and
then chose within each size range cities (for U.S.) and countries
(for non-U.S) balanced by size as well as geographic
(for U.S.) and linguistic/cultural diversity (for non-U.S.).
Although our sample may not be truly representative of the
global community of Facebook users, we believe it represents
a broad cross-section of regional networks.
We used the random network browsing feature of Facebook
which returns thumbnails for up to ten random users
on each retrieval. All retrievals were made by an over 18
user who is a member of the regional network being tested.
Along with the thumbnail for each user, the search returns
HTML links to view the prole and view friends of the user,
if the user's privacy setting allowed it. Based on default settings,
viewing the prole is allowed for all users in the same
network while viewing of friends is allowed for all Facebook
users. We made 200 successive retrievals for each regional
network; up to ten users are returned each time. Users who
have changed their thumbnail privacy setting to not be viewable
by their network will not be found by this approach,
but [7] found only 1.2% had changed this setting. Due to
the repeated random sampling duplicates occurred and were
eliminated in the analysis. We also eliminated cases where
viewing proles of users apparently under 18 (surmised if a
high school student had not yet graduated) were disallowed
because of Facebook's restriction.
Our 20 U.S. regional networks and their privacy settings
results are listed in Table 2 in decreasing order of the number
of network users as reported by Facebook. All results
represent at least 1600-1700 users after elimination of duplicate
entries. This sample size results in a 2-2.5% error
margin with a 95% condence level.
The results in Table 2 show a negative correlation between
network size and percentage of users with viewable proles
ranging from 53% for Chicago to 84% for Casper with a
strong linear correlation coecient of r = ??0:88. Similarly
the percentage of users who allow their friends to be viewed
is even higher and also shows a negative correlation with
network size at r = ??0:85. We do not know the reason
for this strong negative correlation without surveying user
attitudes, but hypothesize that users in smaller networks are
less concerned in making private information available.
We used the same methodology to study results for non-
U.S.-based regional networks. The results, shown in Table
3, show a similar negative correlation with network size
as found in the U.S. results, with r = ??0:80 for viewable
proles and r = ??0:86 for viewable friends. However it is
interesting that the correlation still holds across the many
cultures that these networks represent. The London value
of 51% of users with a viewable prole is lower than what
had been reported in a smaller study last year [14].
compared to their list of friends. We say apparently because
these two settings are not set in the same place within
the Facebook user interface and so dierences may be due to
interface issues. As shown in Table 1, another privacy control
setting in Facebook determines who is allowed to view
a user's Wall of comments. Instead of being available as a
separate setting, it is a subset of the View Prole setting|so
it can only be applied as a further restriction. We examined
this setting for a portion of the U.S.-based regional networks
in our study. In the New York region we found 79% of those
with a viewable prole (42% of all users) allowed their Wall
to be viewable to anyone in the network. It was 83% (53%)
for Seattle and 95% (73%) for theWorcester region. A user's
Wall is thus the most protected privacy bit in Facebook, although
this is necessarily so by its inclusion within the View
Prole setting for a user.
In summary our results show that while there is now some
use of privacy settings by OSN users, there is still a signi
cant portion of OSN users who have not changed their
permissive settings and allow unknown users to view private
bits of information. We did nd a consistent negative correlation
between the use of privacy settings and network size
across both US and non-US-based regional networks.