The existing algorithms for discovering association rules
cannot be applied directly for discovering cyclic association
rules. In order to use the existing algorithms for detecting
cyclic association rules, one may consider extending the
set of items with time attributes, and generate rules. For
example, one such rule could be
This approach segments the database in a manner
transactions that have the same time attribute value are
within the same segment. For example, if the time attribute
is day, then all the transactions that occurred on Mondays
will be within one segment. In this case, the support of the
rule  
is the ratio of the fraction
of all transactions that occurred on Mondays and containand
to all transactions. Similarly, the confidence of
this rule is the ratio of the fraction of all transactions that
occurred on Mondays and contain and
to the fractionof all transactions that occurred on Mondays and contain
However, there are a number of reasons why such an
approach will not solve our problem, as we show below.
First, it is possible that this approach will detect nonexisting
cycles. For example, this approach may detect that
every Monday holds, although
holds only every second Monday, or only on some Mondays but not
on all. This may occur, for example, when the support of  	
, but the ratio of
the fraction of all transactions that occurred on some Mondays that contain both
and to all transactions is below	  	 
That is, the ratio of the fraction of all transactions
that occurred on the remaining Mondays that contain both and 
to all transactions is high enough to compensate
for the other Mondays. In this case, this approach assumes
that the support for
exceeds the
minimum support threshold, although, in fact, the support
is above
the minimum threshold. Therefore, a non-existing cycle—
every Monday can be detected. Another problem with this
approach is that it cannot detect cycles of arbitrary lengths.
For example, it cannot detect an association rule that holds
every 10 days.