The following design goals allow DIMENSIONS to minimize
the bits communicated:
Multi-Resolution Data Storage: A fundamental design goal
of DIMENSIONS is the ability to extract sensor data in a multiresolution
manner from a sensor network. Such a framework offers
multiple benefits (a) it allows users to look at low-resolution
data from a larger region cheaply, before deciding to obtain more
detailed and potentially more expensive datasets (b) Compressed
low-resolution sensor data from large number of nodes can often
be sufficient for spatio-temporal querying to obtain statistical estimates
of a large body of data [7].
Distributed: Design goals of distributed storage systems such
as [8, 9] of designing scalable, load-balanced, and robust systems,
are especially important for resource constrained distributed sensor
networks. We have as a goal that the system balances communication
and computation load of querying and multi-resolution data
extraction from the network. In addition, it should leverage distributed
storage resources to provide a long-term data storage capability.
Robustness is critical given individual vulnerability of sensor
nodes. Our system shares design goals of sensor network protocols
that compensate for vulnerability by exploiting redundancy in communication
and sensing.
Adapting to Correlations in sensor data: Correlations in sensor
data can be expected along multiple axes: temporal, spatial and
between multiple sensor modalities. These correlations can be exploited
to reduce dimensionality. While temporal correlation can be
exploited locally, the routing structure needs to be tailored to spatial
correlation between sensor nodes for maximum data reduction.
The correlation structure in data will vary over time, depending on
the changing characteristics of the sensed field. For example, the
correlation in acoustic signals depend on the source location and
orientation, which can be time-varying for a mobile source. The
storage structure should be able to adapt to the correlation in sensor
data.