The first sensor dataset that we consider is a geospatial dataset
that provides 50 km resolution daily precipitation for the Pacific
NorthWest from 1949-1994 [16]. While the dataset is at a significantly
larger scale than densely deployed sensor networks, the
data exhibits spatio-temporal correlations, providing a useful performance
case study.
The setup comprises a 15x12 grid of nodes, each recording daily
precipitation values. A wide set of queries can be envisaged on such
a dataset: (a) range-sum queries, such as total precipitation over
a specified period from a single node or a region; (b) drill-down
max queries, to efficiently access the node or region that receives
maximum precipitation over a specified period; (c) drill-down edge
queries, to efficiently access and query nodes on an edge between
a high-precipitation and low-precipitation region.
The hierarchy construction proceeds as outlined in Section 3,
with nodes at level 0 performing a one-dimensional temporal wavelet
subband decomposition, and clusterheads at other levels combining
data from the previous level, and performing a three-dimensional
decomposition. We use communication bandwidth as the cost metric
for the compression. Thus, at level i, data from four level 
nodes are combined, subband coded, thresholded, quantized, and
losslessly compressed using Run-Length encoding and Huffman
encoding to fit within the specified target bandwidth. An approximate
target communication bandwidth is chosen since it is computationally
intensive to choose parameters to exactly fit the target
bandwidth.
In the following example, we look at the performance of the hierarchy
for a specific range-sum query: “Find the annual precipitation
between 1949-1994 for each sensor node”. We use two performance
metrics:
 Compression Ratio at level i is ratio of number of bits of
transmitted data to the raw data size. Table 4 shows that the
number of bits transmitted is approximately the same at each
level of the hierarchy, giving us large compression ratios, especially
at higher levels since more data is combined into the
target bandwidth.
 Query error at level i is calculated as jmeasured truej
true . This
metric corresponds to the accuracy in the response for the
range-sum query when clusterheads at level i are queried.
While the error increases at higher levels of the hierarchy,
it is still reasonably low at all layers. For example, 80% of
measurements are within 30% of the true answer for level
1, and 80% of measurements are within 50% at level 3. We
suggest that that such error is sufficient to make preliminary
searchs and then, if desired, drill-down with more detailed
queries.