We implemented our animal tracking instance of directed
diffusion in the ns-2 [2] simulator. Our goals in conducting
this evaluation study were four-fold: First, place the performance
of diffusion in the context of idealized schemes,
such as flooding and omniscient multicast (described below).
This serves as a sanity check for the intuition behind
directed diffusion. Second, understand the impact of
dynamics--such as node failures-~n diffusion. Third, explore
the influence of the radio MAC layer on diffusion performance.
Finally, study the sensitivity of directed diffusion
performance to the choice of parameters.
We choose two metrics to analyze the performance of directed
diffusion and to compare it to other schemes: Average
dissipated energy measures the ratio of total dissipated
energy per node in the network to the number of
distinct events seen by sinks. This metric computes the
average work done by a node in delivering useful tracking
information to the sinks. The metric also indicates the overall
lifetime of sensor nodes. Average delay measures the
average one-way latency observed between transmitting an
event and receiving it at each sink. This metric defines the
temporal accuracy of the location estimates delivered by the
sensor network. We study these metrics as a function of sensor
network size.
In all our experiments, we operate the sensor network in a
regime far from overload. Thus, our sensor nodes do not
experience congestion. We do this to simplify our understanding
of the results. Exploring the behavior of diffusion
under congestion is the subject of future research. In
passing, we note that there exist plausible approaches (such
as in-network data rate downconversion or aggressive data
quality reduction through aggregation) for dealing with congestion
in diffusion-based sensor networks.
Despite this focus on uncongested operating regimes, directed
diffusion can incur event losses, particularly under
dynamics. In these situations, another metric for the performance
of diffusion, is the event delivery ratio. This is the
ratio of the number of distinct events received to the number
originally sent. A similar metric was used in earlier work to
compare ad-hoc routing schemes [4].
To completely specify our experimental methodology, we
need to describe the sensor network generation procedure~
our choice of radio parameters, and our workload. The fol-
:[owing paragraphs do this.
:In order to study the performance of diffusion as a function
of network size, we generate a variety of sensor fields
of different sizes. In each of our experiments, we study five
different sensor fields, ranging from 50 to 250 nodes in increments
of 50 nodes. Our 50 node sensor field generated
by randomly placing the nodes in a 160m by 160m square.
Each node has a radio range of 40m. Other sizes are generated
by scaling the square and keeping the radio range
constant in order to approximately keep the average density
of sensor nodes constant. For each network size, our results
are averaged over three different generated fields.
The ns-P simulator implements a 1.6 Mbps 802.11 MAC
layer. Our simulations use this MAC layer. This is not a
completely satisfactory choice of MAC layer, since there are
compelling energy efficiency reasons for selecting a TDMAstyle
MAC for sensor networks rather than one based on
channel acquisition using RTS/CTS [21]. Briefly, these reasons
have to do with energy consumed by the radio during
idle intervals; with a TDMA-style MAC, it is possible to
put the radio in standby mode during such intervals. By
contrast, an 802.11 radio consumes as much power when it
is idle as when it receives transmissions. To more closely
mimic realistic sensor network radios [13], we altered the
ns-2 radio energy model such that the idle time power dissipation
was about 35mW, or nearly 10% of its receive power
dissipation (395mW), and about 5% of its transmit power
dissipation (660mW). In Section 4.4, we analyze the impact
of a MAC energy model in which listening for transmissions
dissipates as much energy as receiving them.
Finally, in most of our simulations, we use a fixed workload
which consists of five sources and five sinks. All sources
are randomly selected from nodes in a 70m by 70m square
within the sensor field. Sinks are uniformly scattered across
the sensor field. Each source generates two events per second.
The low data rate for directed diffusion was chosen
to be one event in 50 seconds. Events were modeled as 64
byte packets, interests as 36 byte packets. Interests were
periodically generated every 5 seconds, and the interest duration
was 15 seconds. We chose the window for negative
reinforcement to be 2 seconds.
