To study the impact of dynamics on directed diffusion, we
simulated node failures as follows. For each sensor field,
repeatedly turned off a fixed fraction of nodes for 30 seconds.
These nodes were uniformly chosen from the sensor
field, with the additional constraint that an equal fraction
of nodes on the sources to sinks shortest path trees was
also turned off for the same duration. The intent was to
create node failures in the paths diffusion is most likely to
use, and to create random failures elsewhere in the network.
Furthermore, unlike the previous experiment, each source
sends different location estimates (corresponding to the situation
in which each source "sees" different animals). We
did this because the impact of dynamics is less evident when
diffusion suppresses identical location estimates from other
sources. We could also have studied the impact of dynamics
on other protocols, but, because omniscient multicast is an
idealized scheme that doesn't factor in the cost of route recomputation,
it is not entirely clear that such a comparison
is meaningful.
Our dynamics experiment imposes fairly adverse conditions
for a data dissemination protocol. At any instant, 10 or
20 percent of the nodes in the network are unusable. Furthermore,
we do not permit any "settling time" between
node failures. Even so, diffusion is able to maintain reasonable,
if not stellar, event delivery (Figure 5(c)) while incurring
less than 20% additional average delay (Figure 5(b)).
Moreover, the average dissipated energy actually improves,
in some cases, in the presence of node failures. This is a
bit counter-intuitive, since one would expect that directed
diffusion would expend energy to find alternative paths. As
it turns out, however, our negative reinforcement rules axe
conservative enough that several high-quality paths are kept
alive in normal operation. Thus, at the levels of dynamics
we simulate, diffusion doesn't need to do extra work.
The lower energy dissipation results from the failure of some
high-quality paths.
We take these results to indicate that the mechanisms in
diffusion are relatively stable at the levels of dynamics we
have explored. By this we mean that diffusion does not,
under dynamics, incur remarkably higher energy dissipation
or event delivery delays.
