To verify the design of the fusion module and placement
algorithm, we have implemented the tracker application (Figure
1) using the fusion API and deployed it on the iPAQ farm.
Figure 7 shows the topological view of the iPAQ farm used
for the tracker application deployment. It consists of twelve
iPAQ 3870s configured identically to those in the measurements
above. Node 0, where node i is the iPAQ corresponding to ith
node of the grid, acts as the sink node. Nodes 9, 10, and 11 are
the iPAQs acting as the data sources. The location of filter and
collage fusion points are guided by the placement module.
The placement module simulator runs on a separate desktop
in synchrony with the fusion module. At regular intervals, it
collects the transmission details (number of bytes exchanged
between different nodes) from the farm. It uses a simple power
model (discussed later) to account for the communication cost
and to monitor the power level of different nodes. If the placement
module decides to transfer a fusion point to another node,
it invokes the moveFC API to effect the role transfer.
For transmission rates, we have tuned the tracker application
to generate data at consistent rates as shown in Figure 1, with
x equal to 6KBytes per minute. This is equivalent to a scenario
where cameras scan the environment once every minute, and
produce images ranging in size from 6 to 12KBytes after compression.
The network is organized as the grid shown in Figure 7. For
any two nodes, the routing module returns the path with a min
imum number of hops across powered nodes. To account for
power usage at different nodes, the placement module uses a
simple approach. It models the power level at every node, adjusting
them based upon the amount of data a node transmits or
receives. The power consumption corresponds to ORiNOCO
802.11b PC card specification [1]. Our current power model
only includes network communication costs. After finding a
naive tree, the placement algorithm runs in optimization phase
for two seconds. The length of this period is tunable and it influences
the quality of mapping at the end of the optimization
phase. During this phase, fusion nodes wake up every 100ms to
determine if role transfer is indicated by the cost function. After
optimization, the algorithm runs in maintenance phase until
the network becomes fragmented (some consumer cannot reach
one of its inputs). During the maintenance phase, role transfer
decisions are evaluated every 50 seconds. The role transfers are
invoked only when the health improves by a threshold of 5%.
Figure 6 shows the network traffic per unit time (sum of the
transmission rate of every network node) for the cost functions
discussed in Section 4.3. It compares the network traffic for the
actual placement with respect to the best possible placement of
the fusion points (best possible placement is found by comparing
the transmission cost for all possible placements). Note that
the application runtime can be increased by simply increasing
the initial power level of the network nodes.
In MT1, the algorithm finds a locally best placement by the
end of optimization phase itself. The optimized placement is
only 10% worse than the best placement. The same placement
continues to run the application until one of the fusion points
(one with the highest transmission rate) dies, i.e. the remaining
capacity becomes less than 5% of the initial capacity. If we do
not allow role migration, the application will stop at this time.
But allowing role migration, as in MT2, enables the migrating
fusion point to keep utilizing the power of the available network
nodes in the locally best possible way. Results show that
MT2 provides maximum application runtime that is more than
twice as long as that for MT1. The observed network traffic is
at most 12% worse than the best possible for the first half of the
run, and it is same as the best possible rate for the latter half
of the run. MPV performs worst, while MTP has comparable
network lifetime as MT2. Figure 6 also shows that running
the optimization phase before instantiating the application improves
the total transmission rate by 34% compared to the naive
placement.
Though MPV does not provide comparably good network
lifetime (Figure 6B), it provides the best (least) power variance
compared to other cost functions (Figure 8A). Since MT1 and
MT2 drain the power of fusion nodes completely before role
migration, they show worst power variance. Also, the number
of role migrations is minimum compared to other cost functions
(Figure 8B). These results show that the choice of cost function
should be dependent upon application context and network condition.
If, for an application, role transfer is complex and expensive,
but network power variance is not an issue, then MT2
should be preferred. However, if network power variance needs
to be minimized and role transfer is inexpensive, MTP should
be preferred. Simulation results for other task graph configurations
have been found to provide similar insight into the cost
functions’ behavior.