The sensor network consists of a sparse set of sensing nodes of one modality that have a finite sensing radius due to signal attenuation. Objects and other phenomena may pass through the sensor field. The objects affect the signals received by the nodes.
Figure 2 below displays the signal received by three types of sensor at a node in the SensIT experiment [7] as three vehicles pass by in succession. Each of the three modalities displays very
different properties. The seismic modality provides the largest
sensing range, whereas the IR modality has a limited one. The
seismic and acoustic modalities have a greater range of amplitude
in their peaks, which could be used to estimate the distances of the
various objects from the node, whereas in the IR case, the response
is more binary in nature. Additionally, the acoustic and seismic
signals might also allow an estimate of velocity based on the rate of
change of frequency and amplitude, but the IR sensor does not
allow this.
The one property that can be extracted from all three is the time
that the discrete ‘event’ occurs. The resulting event implicitly
provides an estimate for the position of the object, based on the
position of the node. The event could be detected using a simple
peak detector with a suitable energy threshold, as described in [3].
This type of detector assumes little about the modality or
characteristics of the source, although it can be prone to both false
and missed detections.
As objects move through the sensor field, they produce a set of
events. While the SensIT experiment was conducted under very
controlled circumstances, in a real application many detected
events unrelated to moving objects might occur. These false events
might be due to background phenomena, other types of objects not
of interest or perhaps faulty sensors. Figure 2 shows the detections
two objects cause as they move through a fairly dense network
along with some unrelated events.
In such a scenario, a stand alone detector at an individual sensor is
not that useful. Given an event, it is not possible to infer that an
object caused it. Rather than report back each event to a distant
central node, it would be logical to share the evidence among
neighboring nodes and then report any useful results with the
central node. If several correlated events are associated together, a
more accurate hypothesis as to whether the object is present can be
formed, along with an increasingly accurate estimate of its position
and velocity. This idea implicitly performs distributed tracking and
can be extended to that application. In addition, it has been shown
in [4] that several associated classification experiments can
improve classification of the object.