In the near future, advances in processor, memory and radio
technology will enable small and cheap nodes capable of
wireless communication and significant computation. The
addition of sensing capability to such devices will make distributed
microsensing--an activity in which a collection of
nodes coordinate to achieve a larger sensing task---possible.
Such technology can revolutionize information gathering and
processing in many situations. Large scale, dynamically
changing, and robust sensor networks can be deployed in inhospitable
physical environments such as remote geographic
regions or toxic urban locations. They will also enable low
maintenance sensing in more benign, but less accessible, environments:
large industrial plants, aircraft interiors etc.
To motivate our research, consider this simplified model of
how such a sensor network will work (we refine this model in
*This work was supported by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency under grant DABT63-99-1-0011.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the lull citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
MOBICOM 2000 Boston MA USA
Copyright ACM 2000 1-58113-197-6/00/08...$5.00
Section 2). One or more human operators pose, to any node
in the network, questions of the form: "How many pedestrians
do you observe in the geographical region X?", or "Tell
me in what direction that vehicle in region Y is moving".
These queries result in sensors within the specified region being
tasked to start collecting information (Section 2). Once
individual nodes detect pedestrians or vehicle movements,
they might collaborate with neighboring nodes to disambiguate
pedestrian location or vehicle movement direction.
One of these nodes might then report the result back to the
human operator.
Motivated by robustness, scaling, and energy efficiency requirements,
this paper examines a new data dissemination
paradigm for such sensor networks. This paradigm, which
we call directed diffusion I, is data-centric. Data generated
by sensor nodes is named by attribute-value pairs. A node
requests data by sending interests for named data. Data
matching the interest is then "drawn" down towards that
node. Intermediate nodes can cache, or transform data, and
may direct interests based on previously cached data (Section
3).
Using this communication paradigm, our example might
be implemented as follows. The human operator's query
would be transformed into an interest that is diffused towards
nodes in regions X or Y. When a node in that region
receives an interest, it activates its sensors which begin collecting
information about pedestrians. When the sensors
report the presence of pedestrians, this information returns
along the reverse path of interest propagation. Intermediate
nodes might aggregate the data, e.g., more accurately pinpoint
the pedestrian's location by combining reports from
several sensors. An important feature of directed diffusion
is that interest and data propagation and aggregation are
determined by localized interactions (message exchanges between
neighbors or nodes within some vicinity).
Directed diffusion is significantly different from IP-style communication
where nodes are identified by their end-points,
and inter-node communication is layered on an end-to-end
delivery service provided within the network. In this paper,
we describe directed diffusion and illustrate one instantiation
of this paradigm for sensor query dissemination and
processing. We show that using directed diffusion one can
1
Van Jacobson suggested some o f t h e i n i t i a l i d e a s t h a t l a t e r l e d t o t h e design of
directed diffusion.
realize robust multi-path delivery, empirically adapt to a
small subset of network paths, and achieve significant energy
savings when intermediate nodes aggregate responses
to queries (Section 4)
