DFuse is implemented as a multi-threaded runtime system,
assuming infrastructure support for timestamping data produced
from different sensors, and a reliable transport layer for moving
data through the network. Multi-threading the runtime system
enhances opportunities for parallelism in data collection and fusion
function execution for streaming tasks. The infrastructural
assumptions can be satisfied in various ways. As we mentioned
in Section 3, the timestamps associated with the data can be
virtual or real. Virtual timestamping has several advantages,
the most important of which is the fact that the timestamp can
serve as a vehicle for propagating the causality between raw and
processed data from a given sensor. Besides, virtual timestamps
allows an application to choose the granularity of real-time interval
for chunking streaming data. Further, the runtime overhead
is minimized since there is no requirement for global clock
synchronization, making virtual time synchrony attractive for
WASN. For transport, given the multi-hop network topology of
WASN, a messaging layer that supports ad hoc routing is desirable.
Assuming above infrastructure support, implementing DFuse
consists of the following steps:
1. Implementing a multi-threaded architecture for the fusion
module that supports the basic fusion API calls (Section
3), and the other associated optimizations such as
prefetching;
2. Implementing the placement module that supports the
role assignment tasks (Section 4); and
3. Interfacing the two modules for both instantiating the application
task graph and invoking changes in the overlay
network during execution.
The infrastructural requirements are met by a programming
system called Stampede [13, 2]. A Stampede program consists
of a dynamic collection of threads communicating timestamped
data items through channels. Stampede also provides registers
with full/empty synchronization semantics for inter-thread signaling
and event notification. The threads, channels, and registers
can be launched anywhere in the distributed system, and
the runtime system takes care of automatically garbage collecting
the space associated with obsolete items from the channels.
Though Stampede’s messaging layer does not support adaptive
multi-hop ad hoc routing, we adopt a novel way of performing
the evaluation with limited routing support (Section 6). For the
ease of evaluation, we have decoupled the fusion and placement
module implementations. Their interface is a built-in communication
channel and a protocol that facilitates dynamic task
graph instantiation and adaptation using the DFuse API. Transmission
rates exhibited by the application are collected by this
interface and communicated to the placement module.