Figure 5 shows the cost of the DFuse API. In part (a), each
API cost has 3 fields - local, ideal, and API overhead. Local
cost indicates the latency of operation execution without any
network transmission involved, ideal cost includes messaging
latency only, and API overhead is the subtraction of local and
ideal costs from actual cost on the iPAQ farm. Ideally, the remote
call is the sum of messaging latency and local cost. Fusion
channels can be located anywhere in the sensor network. Depending
on the location of the fusion channel’s input(s), fusion
channel, and consumer(s), the minimum cost varies because it
can involve network communications. getFCItem is the most
complex case, having four different configurations and costs independent
of the item sizes being retrieved. For part (a), we create
fusion channels with capacity of ten items and one primitive
Stampede channel as input. Reported latencies are the average
of 1000 iterations.
On our iPAQ farm, netperf [12] indicates a minimum UDP
roundtrip latency of 4.7ms, and from 2-2.5Mbps maximum unidirectional
streaming TCP bandwidth. Table 1 depicts how
many round trips are required and how many bytes of overhead
exist for DFuse operations on remote nodes. From these measurements,
we show messaging latency values in Figure 5(a)
for ideal case costs on the farm. We calculate these ideal costs
by adding latency per round trip and the cost of the transmission
of total bytes, presuming 2Mbps throughput. Comparing
these ideal costs in Figure 5(a) with the actual total cost illustrates
reasonable overhead for our DFuse API implementation.
The maximum cost of operations on a local node is 5.3ms. For
operations on remote nodes, API overhead is less than 74.5%
of the ideal cost. For operations with more than 20ms observed
latency, API overhead is less than 53.8% of the ideal cost. This
figure also illustrates that messaging constitutes the majority of
observed latency of API operations on remote nodes. Note that
ideal costs do not include additional computation and synchronization
latencies incurred during message handling.
The placement module may cause a fusion point to migrate
across nodes in the sensor fusion network. Migration latency
depends upon many factors: the number of inputs and consumers
attached to the fusion point, the relative locations of the
node where moveFC is invoked to the current and resulting fusion
channel, and amount of data to be moved. Our analysis in
Figure 5(b) assumes a single primitive stampede channel input
to the migrating fusion channel, with only a single consumer.
Part (b) shares the same ideal cost calculation methodology as
part (a). Our observations show that migration cost increases
with number of input items and that migration from a remote to
a remote node is more costly than local to remote or remote to
local migration for a fixed number of items. Reported latencies
are averages over 300 iterations for part (b).
