The emerging technology of wireless sensor networks provides many exciting and interesting applications. Such networks can provide an immense raw sensing capability in many different modalities. The huge difficulty in harnessing these networks lies in trying to process all the sensed data in a meaningful and power-efficient manner [1].
An important task for a sensor network is to be able to detect, track and classify objects. As objects move around the sensor field, they affect the observations at nearby nodes. The key to collaboration across nodes is to work out if and how the observations at different nodes are related, and then use these related observations to form more accurate estimates for the objects existence, track and type.
The problem of object detection and classification has been explored in [3] on an individual node basis. There is very little research on distributed detection and tracking within networks of wireless sensors. Object tracking is a topic that has been studied and developed extensively but primarily in the domain of active and passive radar. Graphical modeling techniques such as Kalman filtering and HMMs ([5], [6]) have been employed very successfully in this domain. Complex multiple hypothesis testing techniques are incorporated into their frameworks that rigorously evaluate every possible origin of the measurements received. However, they assume that all the measurements are available for processing at a centralized node. Before continuing, we will outline some key design criteria for any proposed detection or tracking algorithms in the domain of wireless sensor networks:
1. Decentralized processing - While it is easier to consider and design algorithms in an architecture where the sensor outputs are communicated back to a central processing unit, this is generally not feasible. When dealing with a network of un-tethered nodes, a finite amount of energy is a factor that must be taken into consideration. Communication is the primary energy consumer, particularly when one considers that radio signal power in ground based sensor networks drops off at r4 due to the short antenna heights [2]. The key is to process the sensor outputs as much as possible within the network, so as to avoid communicating large amounts of information over large distances.
2. Processing sensed data at the nodes - There are many levels in which the sensed data can be shared and processed among nodes- e.g. signal level, feature level and decision level. At each of these levels, the information content is reduced, but this in turn reduces the required amount of data to be communicated between nodes. In short, processing is cheap and communication is expensive.
3. Dealing with uncertainty - Typically, the exact positions of the nodes might not be known, which will affect any sort of position estimation algorithms. The nodes are typically very low-cost, low-power throwaway devices that might be prone to noise, increasing the chance of false measurements.
4. Incoherent signal processing - Accurately synchronizing such simple cheap devices could be difficult. This combined with non-overlapping sensing ranges in sparse networks limits the use of traditional coherent array processing algorithms [9].
4. Generic algorithms for different modalities - Nodes might be equipped to record signals from many different modalities. These might include acoustic, optical, IR, temperature, radioactive or seismic modalities. (The sensing nodes in the SensIT [7] project recorded signals in three modalities). Devising a generic algorithm that can be applied to the modality available is essential.
Taking these points into account, a possible scenario is proposed, along with a framework for distributed detection and tracking. This is followed with some computer simulations implementing the algorithms and an analysis of the performance and energy savings.