In this section, we provide a back-of-the-envelope comparison
of the benefits of performing a hierarchical wavelet decomposition
over a centralized data collection strategy. Our description will
only address the average and worst case communication load on the
nodes in the network, while Table 3 provides a more complete summary
of the communication, computation and storage complexity.
A square grid topology with n nodes is considered (. Clusterheads at each step
are selected to be the one closest to the lower left-corner of the tile.
Communication is only along edges of the grid, each of which is
of length 1 unit. The cost of transmission and reception of one unit
of data along a link of length 1, costs 1 unit of energy. The chosen
cost metric is communication bandwidth, and each clusterhead is
constrained transmit at mostD0 data. While realistic topologies are
far from as regular as the one proposed [15], and the cost model can
be more complicated, the simple case captures essential tradeoffs
in construction of multi-resolution hierarchies.
Communication Overhead: The overhead for centralized decomposition
can be computed from the total number of edges traversed
on the grid  The worst communication overhead
is the storage node itself, or the sensor node(s) closest to the storage
node, if the storage node is not power constrained. Thus, the
Worst-case communication complexity is O(n1:5D0).
To compute the overhead of the hierarchical decomposition, we
use the fact that at level l of the decomposition, a communication
edge is of length , and there are  tiles (computed
as Area of Region
Area of Tile ), giving a communication overhead of 
Over  levels of decomposition, the total cost is, thus,
 Thus, the total communication cost is O(nD0)
and the Average-case communication cost is O(D0). In the worst
case, a node is on the forwarding path at every level of the hierarchy.
Since there are  levels and each level forwards data
3D0 to a clusterhead, worst case data passing through a node is
 Thus, Worst-case Communication Complexity
