Spatial data reduction involves applying a multi-level 2D wavelet
transform on the coefficients obtained from 1D temporal data reduction
described in Section 3.1. Our goals in designing this routing
protocol are twofold: (a) minimize the communication overhead
of performing a spatial wavelet decomposition (b) balance the
communication, computation and storage load among nodes in the
network. wavRoute uses a recursive grid decomposition of a physical
space into tiles (such as the one proposed in [10]), in conjunction
with geographic routing [11, 12] as shown in Algorithm 1. At
each level of the decomposition, data from four tiles at the previous
level are merged at a chosen node, which stores it in its local
store. The merged streams are further subband coded, thresholded,
and quantized to fit within specified optimization criteria (discussed
in Section 3.4). The compressed stream is sent to the next higher
level of the hierarchy as shown in Figure 2. The algorithm is executed
recursively (Figure 1(a)): all nodes in the network participate
in Step 1, in following steps, only clusterheads from the previous
step participate. In the following sections, we elaborate on the algorithm
used to the select clusterhead location and the geographic
forwarding protocol used.
Clusterhead Selection: To minimize communication cost, the
choice of clusterhead should be tied into the routing structure. We
use a simple clusterhead selection procedure that gives us good
complexity properties (described in Section 5). First, the apex of
the decomposition pyramid is first chosen by hashing into the geographic
region, R (Figure 1(a)). Then, for each tile, the euclidean
shortest path between the centroid of the tile and the apex location
((Xapex; Yapex)) is computed. The point where this path intersects
the tile boundary is chosen to be the location of the clusterhead.
Since each node can independently calculate the location of the tile
based on its own geographic co-ordinates, the clusterhead location
can be independently computed by each node.
Modified GPSR: We use a modified GPSR approach proposed
in [11] to route packets to clusterheads. A brief review of the
approach is described below, details can be obtained from [12] and
[11]. GPSR is a strongly geographic routing protocol that takes a
location rather than an address to deliver packets. [11] propose a
modified GPSR protocol that ensures that packets are delivered to
the node closest to the destination location.