In mobile P2P networks or wireless ad hoc networks, a
number of research studies have been conducted on data
dissemination and discovery [6, 14]. Siddhartha et al. [20]
proposed a P2P data dissemination protocol over an ad hoc
network. It focuses on data transmission, in which a file
is divided into segments according to a particular mobility
model, while it ignores the issue of data search. Papadopouli
et al. [17] introduced a peer-to-peer architecture called 7DS,
which enables data sharing in a self-organizing fashion with
either mobile or stationary nodes by simply using random
forward method. Das et al. [8] studied a cooperative downloading
strategy for content delivery and sharing in wireless
vehicular-to-vehicular (V2V) networks, called SPAWN.
It leverages the inherent broadcast nature of the wireless
medium for neighbor discovery and uses a proximity-based
piece-selection strategy to exchange data pieces. Klemm et
al. [11] presented a special-purpose system for search and
file transfer tailored to both the characteristics of MANET
and the requirements of peer-to-peer file sharing. Motani et
al. [15] proposed a wireless virtual network called PeopleNet,
which mimics the way people seek information via social
networking. It divides nodes into groups and propagates
queries to a particular group based on given types. Wolfson
et al. [22] proposed a rank-based dissemination (RANDI) algorithm
which considers three constraints of mobile devices,
including energy, communication bandwidth and storage.
Tchakarov et al. [21] proposed a Geography-based Content
Location Protocol (GCLP) to make use of physical location
information for efficient content location in ad hoc networks.
Lupu et al. [14] introduced a fast data dissemination method
for structured P2P networks with mobile devices. It quickly
constructs a CAN-like [19] structured P2P network for people
who stay together with a short period of time. Most
of above algorithms investigate how to disseminate the data
in a peer-to-peer environment, which differ from our work
that they push the data to the end users while we focus on
processing the user-issued queries.
More recently, Fiore et al. [10] proposed an algorithm
called Eureka to retrieve user contents in MANET. To the
best of our knowledge, Eureka is the most related work to
our research. It focuses on the query propagation and applies
a pure peer-to-peer approach to conduct data retrieval.
Mobile nodes with Eureka estimate the information density
in their proximity and use it to direct queries toward areas
where the requested data is denser. However, it suffers
from high maintenance cost of indexing information density
estimation of all data items in every node. It also suffers
from high communication overhead caused by information
updating because a single change of information density estimation
can incur the updates of all relevant nodes in the
network. Our proposed IA approach assumes a more general
environment with users in different mobilities, and it is well
adapted to the highly dynamic environment with frequent
data/peer update.