This paper made the case for DIMENSIONS, a large-scale distributed
multi-resolution storage system that exploits spatio-temporal
correlations in sensor data. Many important research issues still
need to be addressed:
What are the benefits from temporal and spatial data compression?
To fully understand correlations in sensor data, and the
benefits provided by temporal and spatial compression, we are deploying
large scale measurement infrastructure, for sensor data collection
in realistic settings,
What processing should be placed at different levels of the hierarchy?
The clusterheads at various levels of the hierarchy can
interpret the data at different scales, to obtain information about
spatio-temporal patterns. A challenging problem is the development
of algorithms for spatio-temporal interpretation of data.
How can we increasing compression benefit without sacrificing
query performance? Our system can be augumented with other
compression techniques such as delta coding, and recent work on
blind source coding [17], to obtain better data compression. Correlation
statistics can be learnt by clusterheads, and exploited to
reduce data at the source.
How can we obtain energy savings from distributed compression?
Better compression doesn’t necessarily translate into energy
savings in communication since the cost of passive listening is
comparable to transmission [1]. Obtaining energy savings in communication
of data involves (a) reducing size of data to be transmitted
(b) scheduling communication to minimize listen time as well
as transmit time. How do we schedule communication to translate
compression benefit to energy benefit?
How can this research be applied to other networked systems?
These techniques may have relevance to other systems where data
is correlated, and massive distributed datasets need to be queried,
such as scientific applications of Grid Computing [21].
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Stefano Soatto for very useful feedback
on theoretical aspects of our system. We would also like to thank
members of the LECS lab for providing feedback on the paper.