Recently, with the advance in mobile wireless communication
technology and the increasing number of mobile users,
mobile devices, such as cell phones, PDAs and pocket PCs,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
CIKM’09, November 2–6, 2009, Hong Kong, China.
Copyright 2009 ACM 978-1-60558-512-3/09/11 ...$10.00.
have become more and more popular in daily life. These
mobile devices generally have gigabytes of storage capacity
and can connect to each other using short-range communication
access, such as Bluetooth [1] and IEEE802.11 [2].
With such portable devices in hand, we can bring hundreds
of documents and multimedia files (i.e., mp3 songs or short
movies) wherever we go. Given these facilities, we can imagine
a scenario where different people are interconnected in
a confined area. For example, in a business district with
adjacent buildings, people can use their mobile devices to
search and share information and resources (e.g., mp3 music
files, e-books, working documents and advertisements),
or to find a person providing a particular service. This kind
of environment is very popular in real life, such as in schools,
business centers, shopping malls, and airports, etc., where
mobile nodes can interconnect with each other in a peer-topeer
(P2P) way to form a mobile P2P network.
In such a mobile network, all nodes are generally gathered
together to form a P2P network and free to move, join or
leave. Since the nodes in the network are highly dynamic
or periodically participate, it is very expensive to maintain
a structured network overlay. Therefore, a reasonable and
practical solution is to construct the nodes in an arbitrary
unstructured way [7, 9]. In this manner, nodes just dynamically
maintain neighbors in their reachable ranges like real
neighborhood in social networks, and no special overlay is
needed. Specifically, mobile P2P environment differs from
the traditional P2P systems based on static nodes. First,
nodes in P2P networks are PCs connected through internet.
They have powerful computing capacity, large storage
and stable interconnection. The situation is totally different
in mobile P2P environment, as mobile devices have
limited resources (computing capacity, storage, bandwidth,
battery power), which means high resource consuming algorithms
used in P2P networks are not suitable for mobile
P2P. Second, nodes in mobile P2P networks are connected
via short-range communication access (e.g. IEEE802.11).
Thus neighbors are adjacent in physical network and data
is transferred in multi-hop manner between non-neighbor
nodes. However, two P2P nodes can directly communicate
via IP address. Third, mobile nodes move from time to
time, which makes the network topology and neighbor relationship
vary rapidly. Thus, information frequently used to
process queries in P2P literature, e.g. profile of neighbors
and query historical records, can not be directly applied. In
a word, query forwarding in mobile P2P environment suffers
from more limitation, uncertainty and complexness.
Most previous works in mobile P2P networks [4, 8, 13, 23,
17, 24] focus on data dissemination and resource discovery
problems, and mainly study how to push the information
to end users in the network. In that case, users are passive
receivers of information. However, most of the users are
likely active searchers of information in real-life applications,
where the users can seek resources they want, search specific
information for certain purposes, find discount advertisements,
or download music or files from the network. In this
paper, we aim at providing active search for end users. Thus,
we tackle the problem of keyword-based query forwarding in
file-sharing unstructured mobile P2P networks. Query forwarding
differs from message routing in mobile P2P environment.
In message routing, the destination of a message is
known. Nodes have a prior knowledge of the routing paths.
However, in query forwarding, there is no prior knowledge
of where to send the messages. This unknown destination
implies more uncertainty and less control in message relaying.
Therefore, the algorithms of distance-aware routing are
not appropriate for query forwarding problem.
There exist some challenges for efficient search in such mobile
P2P networks. First, the query routing strategy must be
efficient although the global index is not available. Second,
due to the constraint of computation capacity, battery energy
and communication bandwidth, the query forwarding
algorithm must be light-weight and energy-efficient. Third,
since the network is highly vulnerable, the solution must be
able to adapt to frequent data updates and high network
fluctuation.
To deal with the above challenges, we adopt the human
strategies in social networking for mobile P2P information
retrieval problem. Differing from previous works [18, 12] in
social networks which utilize social-links, interesting-similarity
or behaviors-alike properties, we exploit the human natural
behaviors of finding answers through acquaintances, learning
from experiences and gossiping words. Intuitively, once
a person has a question, he would ask an acquaintance who
has that knowledge, or who has a wide knowledge that can
potentially answer his question. In our proposed solution for
mobile P2P networks, we use intelligence information about
neighbor peers instead of knowledge of acquaintance. The
intelligence information is a piece of message about where to
find a specific data (file). We use Intelligence Accuracy (IA)
to evaluate the precise of all these intelligence information
provided by its neighbors, which helps peers to find a better
node to further pass the query to its neighbors. In our implementation,
the Intelligence Accuracy is a convenient yet
efficient method to evaluate the distance from a query node
to the resource provider, with which the shortest way can be
determined for the whole search operation in a volatile environment
without a global view. The intelligence information
is exchanged with neighbor peers as the way social peers gossip
words, and spread in neighborhood. It helps peers collect
more information from their neighbors. What’s more, the
peers learn from their query experience, both in success and
failure. After that, they re-adjust the Intelligence Accuracy
(IA) value of the intelligence they used, and make it more
precise and up-to-date. With above mimicking mechanisms
from social networks, we propose an intelligence-based approach
for information retrieval and demonstrate that it can
well tackle the challenges and provide efficient and effective
information retrieval in mobile P2P networks. We further
discuss our proposed approaches under the circumstances of
network fluctuation and data updates to show its scalability
and maintainability.
In summary, our approach is such a keyword-based information
retrieval algorithm that is light-weight, energysaving,
search-efficient and self-adapted, which is well-fit for
the mobile P2P environment. Our contribution includes:
‧ We propose a novel approach for efficient keyword search
in file-sharing mobile P2P networks, based on the mechanisms
mimicking natural human behaviors of finding
answers through acquaintances, learning from experiences
and gossiping words in social networks.
‧ We take advantages of the Intelligence Accuracy (IA)
mechanism, which keeps track of intelligence information
about the timely distance of files in the network,
to improve the performance of the queries.
‧ We specify the processes of our proposed approach in
the situation of network volatility and data updates,
together with cost models to analyze the energy consumption
and communication cost to give a deep view
of the performance of our approach. We show that
our approach is functionally self-adaptive in highly dynamic
networks.
‧ We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the performance
of our proposed approach. The results show
that it is a time efficient and highly self-adaptive approach
with balanced query load and high success rate.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we review the related work. We present the details
of our intelligence-based information retrieval approach in
Section 3. Section 4 describes a performance study and gives
a detailed analysis of results. We finally conclude the paper
in Section 5.