explain what contributes to directed diffusion's energy
efficiency, we now describe two separate experiments. In
both of these experiments, we do not simulate node failures.
First, we compute the energy efficiency of diffusion with and
without aggregation. Recall from Section 4.2 that in our
simulations, we implement a simple aggregation strategy,
in which a node suppresses identical data sent by different
sources. As Figure 6(b) shows, diffusion expends nearly 5
times as much energy, in smaller sensor fields, as when it
can suppress duplicates. In larger sensor fields, the ratio
is 3. Our conservative negative reinforcement rule accounts
for the difference in the performance of diffusion without
suppression as a function of network size. With the same
number of sources and sinks, the larger network has longer
alternate paths. These alternate paths axe truncated by negative
reinforcement because they consistently deliver events
with higher latency. As a result, the larger network expends
less energy without suppression. We believe that suppression
also exhibits the same behavior, but the energy difference
is relatively small.
The second mechanism whose benefits we quantify is negative
reinforcement. This mechanism prunes off higher la-
tency paths, and can contribute significantly to energy savings.
In this experiment, we selectively turn off negative reinforcement
and compare the performance of directed diffusion
with and without reinforcement. Intuitively, one would
expect negative reinforcement to contribute significantly to
energy savings. Indeed, as Figure 6(a) shows, diffusion without
negative reinforcement expends nearly twice as much
energy as when negative reinforcement is employed. This
suggests that even our conservative negative reinforcement
rules prune off paths which deliver consistently higher latency.
In the absence of negative reinforcement or suppression, diffusion's
delay increases by factors of three to eight (the
graphs are not included for lack of space). This is an artifact
of the 802.11 MAC layer. In diffusion, data traffic is
transmitted using MAC unicast. As more paths are used
(in the absence of negative reinforcement), or more copies
of data axe sent (without suppression), MAC-layer channel
contention increases, resulting in backoffs and subsequent
delays.
Finally, we evaluate the sensitivity of our comparisons (Section
4.2) to our choice of energy model. Sensitivity of diffusion
to other factors (numbers of sinks, size of source region)
is discussed in greater detail in [11].
In our comparisons, we selected radio power dissipation parameters
to more closely mimic realistic sensor radios [13].
We re-ran the comparisons of Section 4.2, but with power
dissipation comparable to the AT~zT Wavelan: 1.6W transmission,
1.2W reception and 1.15W idle. In this case, as
Figure 6(c) shows, the distinction between the schemes disappears.
In this regime, we are better off flooding all events.
This is because idle time energy utilization completely dominates
the performance of all schemes. This is the reason
why sensor radios try very hard to minimize listening for
transmissions.