A distributed multi-resolution storage infrastructure benefits search
and retrieval of datasets that exhibit spatial correlation, and applications
that use such data.
Multi-Resolution Data Extraction: Multi-resolution data extraction
can proceed along the hierarchical organization by first extracting
and analyzing low-resolution data from higher level clusterheads.
This analysis can be used to obtain high-resolution data
from sub-regions of the network if necessary.
Querying for Spatio-Temporal features: The hierarchical organization
of data can be used to search for spatio-temporal patterns
efficiently by reducing the search space. For example, consider
the search for pooling of contaminant flow. Such a feature
has a large spatial span, and therefore significant energy benefit
can be obtained by querying only a few clusterheads rather than
the entire network. Temporal patterns can be efficiently queried by
drilling down the wavelet hierarchy by eliminating branches whose
wavelet coefficients do not partially match the pattern, thereby reducing
the number of nodes queried. Summarized coefficients that
result from wavelet decomposition have been found to be excellent
for approximate querying [14, 7], and to obtain statistical estimates
from large bodies of data (Section 6).
Feature Routing and Edge Detection: Target tracking and
routing along spatio-temporal patterns such as temperature contours,
have been identified as compelling sensor network applications.
The problem of edge detection has similar requirements, and
is important for applications like geographic routing, localization,
beacon placement and others, where explicit knowledge of edges
can improve performance of the algorithm. Our architecture can
be used to assist these applications, since it good at identifying discontinuities.
By progressively querying for the specific features,
communication overhead of searching for features can be restricted
to only a few nodes in the network.
Debugging: Debugging data is another class of datasets that exhibits
high correlation. Consider packet throughput data: throughput
from a specific transmitter to two receivers that are spatially
proximate are closely correlated; similarly, throughput from two
proximate transmitters to a specific receiver are closely correlated.
Our system serves two purposes for these datasets: (a) they can be
used to extract aggregate statistics (Section 6) with low communication
cost, and (b) discontinuities represent network hotspots,
deep fades or effects of interference, which are important protocol
parameters, and can be easily queried.