Health of a node is quantified by an application-supplied cost
function. The choice of the particular set of parameters to use in
a cost function depends on the figure of merit that is important
for the application at hand.
We describe four sample cost functions below. They are motivated
by recent works on power-aware routing in mobile ad
hoc networks [14, 9]. The health of a node k to run fusion role
f is expressed as the cost function c(k; f). A fusion node compares
its own health with the reported health of its neighbors,
and it does the role transfer if there is an expected health improvement
that is beyond a threshold. Note that the lower the
cost function value, the better the node health.
Minimize transmission cost - 1 (MT1): This cost function
aims to decrease the amount of data transmission required for
running a fusion function. Input data needs to be transmitted
from sources to the fusion point, and the output data needs to be
propagated to the consumer nodes (possibly across hops). For a
fusion function f with m input data sources (fan-in) and n output
data consumers (fan-out), the transmission cost for placing f on
node k is formulated as:
Here, t(x) represents the transmission rate of the data source
x, and hopCount(i; k) is the distance (in number of hops) between
node i and k.
Minimize power variance (MPV): This cost function tries to
keep the power of network nodes at similar levels. If power(k)
is the remaining power at node k, the cost of placing any fusion
function on that node is:
Minimize ratio of transmission cost to power (MTP): This
cost function aims to decrease both the transmission cost and
lower the difference in the power levels of the nodes. The intuition
here is that the cost reflects how long a node can run the
fusion function. The cost of placing a fusion function f on node
k can be formulated as:
Minimize transmission cost - 2 (MT2): This cost function
is similar to MT1, except that now the cost function behaves
like a step function based upon the node’s power level. For a
powered node, the cost is same as cMT1(k; f), but if the node’s
power level goes below a threshold, then its cost for hosting
any fusion function becomes infinity. Thus, if a fusion point’s
power level goes down, a role transfer will happen even if the
transfer deteriorates the transmission cost. The cost function
can be represented as: