The intrinsic dimension and concepts from the fractal theory have been
successfully employed in indexing and analysis of spacial access methods and
metric trees. Faloutsos et al.) use the intrinsic dimension to estimate the
number of disk accesses of range queries (RQ) in R-Trees.) Pagel et al.) apply
the same approach to k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) queries and query optimization.
B‥ohm) proposes a cost model to RQ and k-NN in high-dimensional spaces
using the intrinsic dimension to deal with attribute correlation. Traina et al.)
also pose a cost estimate for Slim-trees54) based on the concept of intrinsic
dimension. Selectivity estimation of spacial joins and RQ takes advantage of
the intrinsic dimension as well.) B‥ohm et al.) propose a high-dimensional
index structure whose page size is dynamically adapted according to the data
distribution, which is evaluated by measuring the intrinsic dimension of the
dataset.
The fractal theory and the intrinsic dimension have also been explored
in data mining. Barbar’a et al.) designed an incremental clustering algorithm
based on fractal properties of the dataset. Jiang el at.) propose a sampling
technique which preserves the distribution characteristics of the original dataset
through fractal analysis. Traina et a.) developed an attribute selection
technique based on fractal dimension. Chakrabarti et al.) propose a
non-linear, time series forecasting method which uses the intrinsic dimension to
automatically set forecasting parameters. In Reference), the fractal dimension
is applied to measure time diversification of stock portfolios. A tool using
concepts from fractal theory in spatial data mining is proposed in Reference49).
Traina et al.) discuss the use of fractals in data mining and present fractal-based
techniques applied to data mining process, such as dimensionality reduction,
clustering, classification and correlation detection.
In general, related work mentioned in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 proposes
techniques to either process data streams or apply the intrinsic dimension to
analyze conventional databases. However, no previous work employs the intrinsic
dimension to improve data management over data streams. The integration of
both concepts is the main objective of this paper.