In this paper, we described a novel instantiation of directed diffusion (the greedy aggregation) that uses a GIT-like
algorithm to improve path sharing with the low additional cost. Our greedy approach constructs an energy-efficient
aggregation tree using data-centric reinforcement mechanisms (based on a greedy heuristic for weighted set-covering
problems). We evaluated the performance of this greedy-tree approach by comparing it to our prior opportunistic
approach. Our preliminary result suggests that although the greedy aggregation and the opportunistic aggregation
are roughly equivalent at low-density networks, the greedy-tree approach can achieve signficant energy savings at
higher densities. In one experiment we found that the greedy aggregation can achieve up to 45% energy savings
over the opportunistic aggregation without an adverse impact on latency or robustness. Given that the energy is the
scarce resource, this path optimization technique is essential for prolonging the lifetime of the highly-dense sensor
networks.
[1] Elan Amir, Steven McCanne, and Randy H. Katz. An active service framework and its application to real-time multimedia
transcoding. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM, pages 178–189, Vancouver, Canada, September 1998. ACM.
[2] B. Badrinath and P. Sudame. Gathercast: The design and implementation of a programmable aggregation mechanism for
the internet. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN), October 2000.
[3] Sandeep Bajaj, Lee Breslau, Deborah Estrin, Kevin Fall, Sally Floyd, Padma Haldar, Mark Handley, Ahmed Helmy,
John Heidemann, Polly Huang, Satish Kumar, Steven McCanne, Reza Rejaie, Puneet Sharma, Kannan Varadhan, Ya Xu,
Haobo Yu, and Daniel Zappala. Improving simulation for network research. Technical Report 99-702b, University of
Southern California, March 1999. revised September 1999, to appear in IEEE Computer.
[4] Thomas B‥ack, Martin Sch‥utz, and Sami Khuri. A comparative study of a penalty function, a repair heuristic, and stochastic
operators with the set-covering problem. In Artificial Evolution, pages 3–20. Springer, Berlin, 1996.
[5] J.E. Beasley. A lagrangian heuristic for set-covering problems. Naval Research Logistics, 37:151–164, 1990.
[6] T.H. Cormen, C.E. Leiserson, and R.L. Rivest. Introduction to Algorithms. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990.
[7] Deborah Estrin, Ramesh Govindan, John Heidemann, and Satish Kumar. Next century challenges: Scalable coordination
in sensor networks. In Proceedings of the Fifth Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networking (Mobicom’99), Seattle, Washington, August 1999.
[8] M. Faloustsos, A. Banerjea, and R. Pankaj. Qosmic: Quality of service multicast internet protocol. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGCOMM, September 1998.
[9] T. Grossman and A.Wool. Computational experience with approximation algorithms for the set covering problem. Euro.
J. Operational Research, 101(1):81–92, August 1997.
[10] John Heidemann, Fabio Silva, Chalermek Intanagonwiwat, Ramesh Govindan, Deborah Estrin, and Deepak Ganesan.
Building efficient wireless sensor networks with low-level naming. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, Banff, Canada, October 2001.