We have studied efficient methods for mining partial periodicity
in time series database. Partial periodicity, which
associates periodic behavior with only a subset of all the
time points, is less restrictive than full periodicity and thus
covers a broad class of applications.
By exploring several interesting properties related to partial
periodicity, including the Apriori property, the maxsubpattern
hit set property, and shared mining of multiple
periods, a set of partial periodicity mining algorithms are
proposed, with their relative performance compared. Our
study shows that the max-subpattern hit set method, which
needs only two scans of the time series database, even for
mining multiple periods, offers excellent performance.
Our study has been confined to mining partial periodic
patterns in one time series for categorical data with single
level of abstraction. However the method developed
here can be extended for mining multiple-level, multipledimensional
partial periodicity and for mining partial periodicity
with perturbation and evolution.
For mining numerical data, such as stock or power consumption
fluctuation, one can examine the distribution of
numerical values in the time-series data and discretize them
into single- or multiple- level categorical data. For mining
multiple-level partial periodicity, one can explore levelshared
mining by first mining the periodicity at a high level,
and then progressively drilling-down with the discovered
periodic patterns to see whether they are still periodic at a
lower level.
Perturbation may happen from period to period which
may make it difficult to discover partial periodicity in many
applications. For mining partial periodicity with perturbation,
one method is to slightly enlarge the time slot to be
examined. Partial periodic patterns with minor perturbation
are likely to be caught in the generalized time slot. Another
method is to include the features happening in the time slots
surrounding the one being analyzed. We can further employ
regression technique to reduce the noise of perturbation.
There are still many issues regarding partial periodicity
mining which deserve further study, such as further exploration
of shared mining for mining periodicity with multiple
periods, mining periodic association rules based on partial
periodicity, and query- and constraint- based mining of partial
periodicity [11]. We are studying these problems and
implementing our algorithms for mining partial periodicity
in a data mining system and will report our progress in the
future.