Our first experiment compares the greedy aggregation to the opportunistic aggregation for data dissemination in sensor networks. Figure 5(a) shows the average dissipated energy per packet as a function of the network density.
Assuming the perfect aggregation, the greedy aggregation has noticeably better energy efficiency than the opportunistic approach for high-density networks. For some sensor fields, its dissipated energy is only 55% that of the opportunistic aggregation. Given a high-density network, there exist several shortest paths from a source to a sink.
The available path diversity reduces the probability of path sharing among different sources for the opportunistic aggregation. The dissipated energy for both approaches increases with network size due to some diffusion overhead(e.g., flooding of interests and exploratory events).
Figure 5(b) plots the average delay observed as a function of the network density. The greedy aggregation has a delay comparable to the opportunistic aggregation. This is a bit surprising because we expected that the greedy aggregation would trade off delay for energy efficiency. In low-density networks, the greedy aggregation has a bit longer delay because there are not many shortest paths. Thus, a shared path to a new source is unlikely to be a shortest path. Conversely, in high-density networks, the greedy approach has a bit lower delay because a shared
path to a new source can still be close to a shortest path. Unlike the greedy aggregation, the opportunisitc approach does not encourage path sharing. Given the random jitter delay and the MAC fairness, the lowest-delay paths for sources are unlikely to be shared, particularly in high-density networks. Therefore, in high-density networks, the opportunistic aggregation is less energy-efficient and the overall traffic reduction is less. As a result, the delay of the opportunistic aggregation is a bit longer for the high-density networks, given a constant bandwidth.
The result in Figure 5(c) indicates that, for these uncongested networks without network dynamics, both approaches achieve the similar distinct-event delivery ratio as expected.