In the past few years, the emerging variety of applications generating
continuous sequences of data over long periods of time has increased the
research interest in data streams. Examples of such applications include
telecommunication networks, financial transactions, stock quotes, on-line
auctions, tollbooth observations, manufacturing, security, medical data,
telemetry data collection (environmental readings and sensor networks in
general), to name just a few.
Formally, a data stream is a real-time, continuous, potentially unbounded
sequence of events e1; e2; :::; where each event ei is represented by a set of E
measured attributes ei = (a1; a2; :::aE).
Data streams often exhibit changes over time, which is referred to as data
evolution. By understanding the behavior of the data, the analyst is able to
make decisions in many enterprises. Therefore, it is useful to develop techniques
to obtain a summarization of the key characteristics of the evolving data in a
fast and effective way.
In traditional database applications, an important characteristic of a
dataset is its embedding dimension, which has a large impact on indexing and
querying operations. However, the behavior of a persistent dataset can be better
described through its intrinsic dimension D. Whereas the number of attributes
in a dimensional dataset determines its embedding dimension E, D is a measure
of the amount of information the dataset represents. Thus, D is an indication
of the existence of correlated attributes.51) Moreover, algorithms developed to
analyze large high dimensional datasets with low D can be configured to expect
lower data complexity and, in consequence, to operate with better performance.
The concept of intrinsic dimension has been applied to several activities, as
discussed in Section 3.2.
Similarly to traditional database systems, data streams can also benefit
from the knowledge of the intrinsic dimension D, which can be explored to
examine the behavior of the events over time. In particular, measurements of D
can indicate general changes and correlations among attributes. The following
examples illustrate how the intrinsic dimension is related to the changing
behavior of evolving data streams.
Example 1: a sensor network measuring air flow in a wind tunnel. If the
air flows slowly, its movement tends to be linear, generating a data stream
with low D. On the other hand, if the air flow increases, its movement
becomes turbulent and the value of D is expected to be higher. Figure 1
shows an evolving data stream whose behavior changes from a uniform
to an irregular pattern, illustrating measures of one sensor in slow and
turbulent air flows, respectively.
Example 2: a data stream defined by spot-prices of currencies (based
on American dollar) over a certain period of time. Changes in local
and international financial markets or in exchange policies may modify
the correlations among the currencies, either increasing/decreasing the
number of correlated currencies or altering the specific currencies involved
in correlations. This idea is illustrated in Fig. 2, which shows the evolving
behavior of a synthetic data stream composed of 3 attributes. In the 1st
period of time, the attributes x, y and z are linearly correlated and D
is close to 1.0; in the 2nd period, the attribute z is no longer correlated
to the others, increasing the value of D to 2.0; finally, in the last period
of time the attributes are completely independent and D is expected to
be closer to 3.0. Note that, by analyzing each attribute individually, it is
impossible to tell that the evolving behavior of the stream is related to
changes in the correlations between the attributes. On the other hand,
the value of D measured over time suggests correlation changes.
The intrinsic dimension D can also be valuable, for example, in cost
and selectivity estimation of continuous queries performed over persistent
and transient streams, query optimization, feature selection and time series
forecasting.
This paper offers the following contributions.
A new and efficient method to obtain a dynamic value of the intrinsic
dimension D, according to the behavior of changing data.
An algorithm with linear computational cost that:
– processes each incoming event only once;
– answer the value of D for recent events at any time, as soon as a
reasonable number of initial events are provided.
A set of experiments both validating the new method and demonstrating
the practical use of D in real data streams.
We consider every event ei to be defined by a fixed number of attributes,
such that ei is an element from a multidimensional domain. Therefore, the value
of D for recent (windowed) events can be estimated by the Correlation Fractal
Dimension D2, computed through the “Box-Occupancy Counting” approach.45)
A preliminary version of our work was presented in Reference46). Here, we also
discuss the use of the intrinsic dimension to analyze the stream behavior in terms
of attribute correlations.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines
background concepts underpinning the method we propose. Section 3 presents
previous work on data streams and on intrinsic dimension. Section 4
discusses the main properties of data streams and the algorithm we developed
to continuously measure D. Section 5 discusses experimental studies that
corroborates the method proposed herein. Section 6 concludes the paper.
