[ 1 ] Experiments on NEMMCO
The experiments to be discussed in this section were performed on real
data collected from the Australian National Electricity Market Management
Company (NEMMCO).) Historical data available in NEMMCO site include 30
minute average price and demand of electricity, from 07/DEC/98 to 28/FEB/06,
in five regions of Australia: NSW, QLD, SA, SNOWY and VIC. The prices
are determined according to the demand and supply of the market. Figure 15
illustrates demand and price collected in July 2005 (winter) and January 2006
(summer) for region NSW (New SouthWales), where Sydney is located. Demand
measures are depicted at the top of each graph and price measures are shown at
the bottom.
From the historical data in NEMMCO, we created two datasets: Nemmco
Demand and Nemmco Price, respectively containing demand and price of
the five regions. Each data stream is thus composed of 126,751 events with
5 attributes each (one attribute for each region). The main goal of this
experimental study was to analyze the behavior of the data over time, focusing
on potential correlations among the regions for demand and price of electricity.
We sized a sliding window to compute D over the last 3 months and
update it every month, approximately. Demand and price are set every 30
minutes, leading to 48 events per day. With no significant impact on the results,
we considered 1,464 events per month (around 30 and a half days) a reasonable
mean to deal simply with months of different lengths. Thus, we set 3 counting
periods (nc = 3) with 1,464 events each (ni = 1; 464). Figure 16 shows how
the intrinsic dimension varies over time for demand and price data. The dashed
lines indicate the values of D measured after the events of January of each year.
From Fig. 16a-b we can state that:
2 in general, the intrinsic dimension is higher for Nemmco Demand data
stream than for Nemmco Price, indicating that, among regions, there is
more variation of the electricity demand than variation of the electricity
price;
 the overall behavior of the intrinsic dimension is similar for every year in
both data streams. Higher values of D around winter months and lower
values around summer months show that the correlations among distinct
regions someway differ according to the season of the year.
In fact, by analyzing the measurements of D in Fig. 16a, we can observe
that D is around 3.2 in the summer, indicating that, in general, only 3 of the
regions dictate the electricity demand during this season, while the other 2 are
somehow correlated to the formers. On the other hand, in the winter D is around
3.8, indicating that only one of the regions is correlated to some others. To put
it simply, the variation of electricity demand in different regions is higher during
the winter. A similar behavior can be observed in Nemmco Price.
It is relevant to point out that whereas the values of D can distinguish
different correlations at different seasons, an analysis of the raw data (in
Figure 15, for example) does not enable one to perceive this difference.
[ 2 ] Experiments on SPOTEXRATES
The SpotExrates dataset32) contains work-daily spot prices (foreign
currency in American dollars) of 12 currencies over the period of 10/SEP/86
to 8/SEP/96. In our experiments, each currency is an attribute (E = 12) and
the daily prices of the 12 currencies are events (N = 2; 567). We chose to use
the events of (approximately) a year to define each counting period (ni = 257),
thus allowing further analyzes on the behavior of the stream from year to year.
The intrinsic dimension is measured over the past 5 years (nc = 5).
Figure 17 shows that the variation of D is more significant during the
first 4 years, indicating that the fluctuation of the spot prices in this period was
higher than that in the next years. From the 6th period on, the events of the
first years are discarded, reducing the fluctuation of D. Furthermore, D is much
lower than the embedding dimension E over time, suggesting the existence of
many correlated currencies. Recall from Section 2 that if the attributes of a
dataset are completely uncorrelated then D closely approaches E; otherwise, if
there are correlated attributes, D is lower than E accordingly.
[ 3 ] Experiments on WIND
The Wind dataset32) contains daily average wind speeds at 12 synoptic
meteorological stations in the Republic of Ireland, from year 1961 to 1978.
The original data is composed of 15 attributes: year, month and day of the
measurements, and average wind speed at each of the 12 stations. We used only
the 12 values of wind speed, and defined each period based on the events of a
year.
In Fig. 18, the increase in D during the first 10 years indicates a meaningful
variation on the behavior of the data, that is, the values of wind speed measured
at the stations varied, such that the correlations between the attributes also
changed, increasing the value of D from 5.6 to 6.9. Higher values of D indicate
less correlations among the stations. In other words, this experiment suggests
that the wind behavior is more chaotic, considering different stations, after the
10th counting period.