A popular key idea used in the efficient mining of association
rules is the Apriori property discovered in [2]: If one
subset of an itemset is not frequent, then the itemset itself
cannot be frequent. This allows us to use frequent itemsets
of size
  Interestingly, for each period p, the proterty supporing
the Apriori "trick" still holds:


Property 3.1 [Apriori on periodicity] Each subpattern of
a frequent pattern of period
is itself a frequent pattern of
period
?
The proof is based on the fact that patterns are more restrictive
than their subpatterns Suppose is a subpattern of a frequent pattern
Then is obtained from by changing
some set of letters to a subset or Hence is more restrictive than 
and thus the frequency count of is greater than
or equal to that of Thus is frequent as well.
An algorithm for mining partial periodic patterns for a
given fixed period based on this Apriori “trick” was presented
in [7]. We include a simplied version here for the
sake of completeness.
Algorithm 3.1 [Single-period Apriori] Find all partial periodic
patterns for a given period
satisfying a given confidence
threshold min conf in time-series , based on the
Apriori property 3.1.
Method.
1. Find, the set of frequent 1-patterns of period, by accumulating
the frequency count for each 1-pattern in each
whole period segment and selecting among them whose
frequency count is no less than, where
a is the maximum number of periods.
2. Find all frequent-patterns of period, for
from 2 up to, based on the idea of Apriori, and terminate immediately
when the candidate frequent-pattern set is empty.
Analysis.
Number of scans over the time series. Step 1 of the
algorithm needs to scan the time series once. Step 2 needs
to scan up to times in the worst case. Thus the total
number of scans is no more than the period
Space needed. (1) At Step 1, suppose there exist a total of
distinct features at positions in where is the number such that We
need units of space to hold the counts. In the worst case when every 
feature is distinct in the entire time series we need units of space
After Step 1, we only need units of space to keep the set of frequent
patterns in.(2) At Step 2, the maximum number of candidate subpatterns 
that we may generate is Considering that we still need space to keep the 
set of frequent 1-patterns, the total amount of space needed is  in the
worse case in this computation. However, the average case
should be much smaller than the worst case since if every
feature is distinct in the time series, then there is no need to
find periodic patterns. The existence of any periodicity in
the time series will reduce the memory needed.