Finding periodic patterns in time series databases is an
important data mining task with many applications. Many
methods have been developed for searching periodicity patterns
in large data sets [8]. However, most previous methods
on periodicity search are on mining full periodic patterns,
Research was supported in part by research grants from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and the Networks
of Centres of Excellence Program of Canada
Part of this work was done while visiting Simon Fraser University
during his sabbatical from University of Melbourne, Australia.
where every point in time contributes (precisely or approximately)
to the cyclic behavior of the time series. For example,
all the days in the year approximately contribute to the
season cycle of the year. A useful related type of periodic
patterns, called partial periodic patterns, which specify the
behavior of the time series at some but not all points in time,
have not received enough attention. An example partial periodic
pattern may state that Jim reads the Vancouver Sun
newspaper from 7:00 to 7:30 every weekday morning but
his activities at other times do not have much regularity.
Thus, partial periodicity is a looser kind of periodicity than
full periodicity, and it exists ubiquitously in the real world.
The purpose of the current paper is to fill the gap by considering
the efficient mining of partial periodic patterns.
Most methods for finding full periodic patterns are either
inapplicable to or prohibitively expensive for the mining
of partial periodic patterns, because of the mixture of
periodic events and non-periodic events in the same period.
For example, FFT (Fast Fourier Transformation) cannot be
applied to mining partial periodicity because it treats the
time-series as an inseparable flow of values. Some periodicity
detection methods can detect some partial periodic
patterns, but only if the period, and the length and timing
of the segment in the partial patterns with specific behavior
are explicitly specified. For the newspaper reading example,
we need to explicitly specify details such as “find the regular
activities of Jim during the half-hour after 7:00 for the
period of

hours.” A naive adaptation of such methods to
our partial periodic pattern mining problem would be prohibitively
expensive, requiring their application to a huge
number of possible combinations of the three parameters of
length, timing, and period.
Besides full periodicity search, there are many recent
studies on time series data mining: Most concentrate on
symbolic patterns, although some consider numerical curve
patterns in time series. Agrawal and Srikant [3] developed
an Apriori-like technique [2] for mining sequential
patterns. Mannila et al. [10] consider frequent episodes in
sequences, where episodes are essentially acyclic graphs
of events whose edges specify the temporal before-andafter
relationalship but without timing-interval restrictions.
Inter-transaction association rules proposed by Lu et al. [9]
are implication rules whose two sides are totally-ordered
episodes with timing-interval restrictions (on the events in
the episodes and on the two sides). Bettini et al. [5] consider
a generalization of inter-transaction association rules:
these are essentially rules whose left-hand and right-hand
sides are episodes with time-interval restrictions. However,
unlike ours, periodicity is not considered in these studies.
Similar to our problem, the mining of cyclic association
rules by O‥ zden, et al. [12]

also considers the mining of
some patterns of a range of possible periods. Observe that
cyclic association rules are partial periodic patterns with
perfect periodicity in the sense that each pattern reoccurs in
every cycle, with

		
confidence. The perfectness in periodicity
leads to a key idea used in designing efficient cyclic
association rule mining algorithms: As soon as it is known
that an association rule

does not hold at a particular instant
of time, we can infer that

cannot have periods which
include this time instant. For example, if the maximum period
of interest is

and it is discovered that

does not
hold in the first

time instants, then

cannot have any
periods. This idea leads to the useful “cycle-elimination”
strategy explored in that paper. Since real life patterns are
usually imperfect, our goal is not to mine perfect periodicity
and thus “cycle-elimination” based optimization will not be
considered here.
 An Apriori-like algorithm has been proposed for mining
imperfect partial periodic patterns with a given (single) period
in a recent study by two of the current authors [7]. It
is an interesting algorithm for mining imperfect partial periodicity.
However, with a detailed examination of the data
characteristics of partial periodicity, we found that Apriori
pruning in mining partial periodicity may not be as effective
as in mining association rules.
Our study has revealed the following new characteristics
of partial periodic patterns in time series: The Apriori-like
property among partial periodic patterns still holds for any
fixed period, but it does not hold for patterns between different
periods. Furthermore, there is a strong correlation
among frequencies of partial patterns.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows. We
consider the efficient mining of partial periodic patterns, for
a single period as well as for a set of periods. We propose
several mining algorithms, by exploring some interesting
properties related to partial periodicity such as the Apri-
It is important to point out that [12] concentrates on the elimination of
candidate itemsets for the association rule mining algorithm, although the
cycle-elimination strategy does lead to a small reduction on the number of
patterns when we process the time series from left to right.
Note that a modified strategy, where we stop considering certain patterns
as soon as the length of the time series to be processed is not enough
to make the confidence higher than the threshold, can be used.
ori property and the max-subpattern hit set property, and by
shared mining of multiple periods. The max-subpattern hit
set property is a vital new property which allows to derive
the counts of all frequent patterns from a relatively small
subset of patterns mined from the time series. We show
that mining partial periodicity needs only two scans over the
time series database, even for mining multiple periods. The
performance study shows our proposed methods are very
efficient. The proposed methods are also robust that can
be applied in a variety of cases including mining multiplelevel
partial periodicity and mining partial periodicity with
perturbation and evolution.
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, concepts related to partial periodicity are introduced.
In Section 3, methods for mining partial periodicity
in regard to both single and multiple periods are studied.
In Section 4, the implementation of a novel data structure,
namely the max-subpattern tree, for facilitating the counting
of the hit maximal patterns, and the derivation of the set
of frequent patterns from the hit maximal patterns, are presented.
In Section 5, a comparison of the performance of
the proposed algorithms is reported. We conclude our study
in Section 6.