The algorithm computes two scores for each document:
a hub score and an authority score. Documents that have
high authority scores are expected to have relevant content,
whereas documents with high hub scores are expected
to contain links to relevant content. The intuition
is as follows. A document which points to many others
is a good hub, and a document that many documents
point to is a good authority. Transitively, a document
that points to many good authorities is an even better
hub, and similarly a document pointed to by many good
hubs is an even better authority.
In the context of a user query the algorithm rst
constructs a query specic graph whose nodes are documents.
Then it iteratively computes the hub and authority
scores for the nodes. The graph is constructed as
follows. A start set of documents matching the query is
fetched from a search engine (say the top 200 matches).
This set is augmented by its neighborhood, which is the
set of documents that either point to or are pointed to
by documents in the start set. In practice, since the indegree
of nodes can be very large, Kleinberg recommends
considering at most 50 predecessors of a document. The
documents in the start set and its neighborhood together
form the nodes of the neighborhood graph. Hyperlinks between
documents not on the same host form the directed
edges. Links within the same host1 are assumed to be by
the same author and hence are not indicators of value.
The computation of hub and authority scores is done as
follows.
Kleinberg [21] proved that the H and A vectors will eventually
converge, i.e., that termination is guaranteed. In
practice we found the vectors to converge in about 10
iterations. The documents are then ranked by hub and
authority scores respectively.
Note that the algorithm does not claim to nd all
relevant pages, since there may be some that have good
content but have not been linked to by many authors. In
our evaluation of dierent algorithms we use Kleinberg's
algorithm [21] as our baseline, which we call base.