Having presented our solutions for queries over stream
sensor data, we now discuss related projects in the sensor
and database domains.
The work most closely related to ours is the Cougar
project at Cornell [18], which is also intended for query processing
over sensors. Their research, however, is more focused
on modeling streams as persistent, virtual relations
and enabling user queries over sensors via abstract data
types. Their published work to date does not focus on the
power or resource limitations of sensors, because it has been
geared toward larger, powered sensors. They do not discuss
the push based nature of sensor streams. Our work is complementary
to theirs in the sense that they are more focused
on modeling sensor streams, whereas we are interested in
the practical issues involved in efficiently running queries
over streams.
There has been significant work in the database community
focused on the language and operator design issues for
querying data streams. Early work sought to design operators
for streams in the context of functional programming
languages like Lisp and ML [17], or for specialized
regimes like network router log analysis [25]. Seshadri, et.
al. [22] brought this work fully into the domain of relational
databases by describing extensions to SQL for stream query
processing via windowed and incremental operators.
More recent research on streams continues to extend relational
databases with complex operators for combining
and mining data streams. For instance, [7] showed single
pass algorithms to compute complex, correlated aggregates
over sets of streams.
The CONTROL project [11] discusses the possibility of
user interfaces for the incrementally sorting and aggregating
very large data sets which is also applicable to streams.
Shanmugasundaram et. al, [24] discuss techniques for percolating
partial aggregates to end users which also apply.
Existing work on continuous queries provides some interesting
techniques for simultaneously processing many
queries over a variety of data sources. These systems provide
an important starting point for our work but are not directly
applicable as they are focused on continuous queries
over traditional database sources or web sites and thus don’t
deal with issues specific to streaming sensor data.
The NiagaraCQ project [5] is the most recent work focused
on providing continuous queries over changing web
sites. Users install queries, which consist of an XMLQL
query as well as a duration and re-evaluation interval.
Queries are evaluated periodically based on whether the
sites have changed since the query was last run. The system
is geared toward running very large numbers of queries over
diverse data sources. The system is able to perform well by
grouping similar queries, extracting the common portion of
those queries, and then evaluating the common portion only
once. We expect that this technique will apply to streaming
sensor queries as well: there will be many queries over a
particular stream which share common subexpressions.
The XFilter system [1] is another example of a continuous
query system. It indexes XML queries to enable efficient
routing of streaming XML documents to users; this
index could form the basis of an efficient implementation
of query processing over XML data streaming from sensor
networks.
In the remote sensing community, there are a number of
systems and architecture projects focused on building sensor
networks where data-processing is performed in a distributed
fashion by the sensors themselves. In these scenarios,
sensors are programmed to be application aware, and
operate by forwarding their readings to nearby sensors and
collecting incoming readings to produce a locally consistent
view of what is happening around them. An example
of such a design is Directed Diffusion from researchers at
USC [13].