Advances in radio, sensor, and VLSI technology will enable small and inexpensive sensor nodes capable of wireless
communication and significant computation. Large-scale networks of such sensors may require novel data dissemination
paradigms which are scalable, robust, and energy-efficient [7]. One such paradigm is directed diffusion [12]
which incorporates data-centric routing and application-specific processing inside the network (e.g., data aggregation).
Given that the communication cost is several orders of magnitude higher than the computation cost [16],
directed diffusion can achieve significant energy savings with in-network data aggregation. This benefit of data
aggregation has been confirmed theoretically [14] and experimentally [10].
The instantiation of directed diffusion described in the earlier work establishes low-latency paths between
sources (sensor nodes that detect phenomena) and sinks (user nodes) using only localized algorithms. Data from different
sources can be opportunistically aggregated at intermediate nodes along the established paths. Energy-wise,such path selection with opportunistic aggregation is not optimal because paths from different sources to a sink may
not be early shared or merged. Thus, data may not be aggregated (or reduced) near the sources (Figure 1). To achieve
more energy savings, one could design another diffusion instantiation which favors path selection to increase early
sharing of paths and reduce energy consumpition.
However, there are drawbacks for early path sharing: higher latency and less robustness. Some paths will
be longer to trade off for early aggregation. Given that an aggregate generally contains more information than a
non-aggregated message, a loss of an aggregate adversely impacts the quality of the result more than a loss of a
non-aggregated message. Conversely, there are practical constraints that favor early path sharing. For example, the
early aggregation reduces overall traffic which is preferable, given the limited bandwidth (Section 5).
Nevertheless, it is not obvious that such path optimization will practically lead to significant energy savings.
Specifically, the additional cost of establishing the optimal aggregation tree could be dramatically high. Assuming
perfect aggregation (i.e., the data size of an aggregate is equal to the data size of an individual event), the cost of the
tree is the number of links on the tree. Therefore, finding the optimal aggregation tree is computationally infeasible
because it is equivalent to finding the Steiner tree that is known to be NP-hard [23]. Thus, we do not expect to get
an optimal tree. Imperfect aggregation and a sub-optimal aggregation tree can further limit the energy savings.
One promising heuristic is a greedy incremental tree (GIT) [18]. To construct a greedy incremental tree, a
shortest path is established for only the first source to the sink whereas each of the other sources is incrementally
connected at the closest point on the existing tree. In this paper, we propose a new instantiation of directed diffusion
that uses a GIT-like algorithm (Section 4) to improve path sharing. We have implemented this greedy-tree approach
in ns-2 and we compare it to our prior opportunistic approach (Section 5). Our preliminary result suggests that
although the two are roughly equivalent at low-density networks, the greedy-tree can achieve signficant energy
savings at higher densities. Recent work has compared the greedy incremental tree with the shortest path tree
(SPT) using abstract simulations [14]. Based on the event-radius model and the random sources model, their results
indicate that the transmission savings by the GIT over the SPT do not exceed 20%. However, the energy savings
of our greedy aggregation can definitely be much higher than 20%, given our source placement schemes and highdensity
networks (Section 5.4).
