The most prominent work in top-k query processing has been
defined by the seminal approach of Fagin et al. on the Threshold
Algorithm (TA) [3] which was designed for standalone database
applications. But especially for p2p applications, TA seems
insufficient since it requires several round-trips to return the
results (unpredictable time and network consumption) because it
doesn’t take data distributions into account. To the direction of
TA adjustment for distributed networks, four algorithms TPUT
[4] and {TPAT, TPOR, HT} [1] have been presented including 3
basic phases and using thresholds to order to determine the final
top-k set of objects. These algorithms seem to overcome the
problems of TA and belong to the class of exact algorithms which
means that they return exactly the real highest ranked objects
without any kind of prediction. TPUT prunes ineligible objects
based on their scores in 3 standard phases and in its evaluation
outperforms TA in most cases [1]. TPAT does not belong to the
category of exact algorithms since it uses statistics to further
enhance the pruning power of TPUT. However, both TPAT and
TPUT algorithm assume uniform data distribution which could be
restrictive as, in real p2p systems some peers may host data
following other distributions. TPOR prunes ineligible objects by
their rankings (positions in sorted lists). The Hybrid Threshold
Algorithm [1] combines the advantages of both TPUT and TPOR,
estimates data distributions without a-priori knowledge, which
means that it does not assume a specific distribution of scores. It
is based on partial sums and upper bounds to prune non-eligible
objects, and terminates in a fixed number of 3 + 1 phases.
It is worth noting that all the above algorithms except TPAT
belong to the family of exact algorithms, which means that they
always return the highest ranked objects correctly without using
any sense of probabilities. The latter refers to another category of
algorithms usually termed approximate which enable the final
pruning of objects under specific probabilistic guarantees is
achieved using routing filters and histograms. A detailed
presentation of exact, approximate and combined approaches can
be found in [2]. Also in [2, 5] some related problems such as the
query routing and the ranking of objects are addressed.