We show the trees constructed by three types of the DAB
method under the city mobility model:
‧ A single-step run, where a single DAB step is used. This
type of run disregards the information about movement
frequencies, and thus serves as a basis for comparison.
‧ A coarse-resolution run, where DAB uses a small number
of steps.
‧ A fine-resolution run, where DAB uses a large number of
steps. Even though this type of run utilizes movement frequencies,
it suffers from large delays due to limited availability
of merging choices in the balancing phase of each
DAB step.
In addition, we plot the communication cost and tree height
achieved using varying numbers of DAB steps. For both 1D
and 2D cases, we use the expected value of the average weight
as the first threshold , and exponentially decaying thresholds
thereafter. That is, . Each data point
reported represents the average of 5 runs.
The locations of intermediate nodes were placed to minimize
the communication cost as defined in Section 2B, using an
optimizing heuristic. However, in Figure 7, intermediate nodes
are placed between their subtrees for easy inspection. In experiments
where the communication cost of DAB is compared to
that of other methods, the same layout optimizing heuristic was
applied to all trees under comparison.
1) Results for a 1D Sensor Graph
Figure 7a shows the outcome of the single-step DAB run,
where the resulting tree is almost fully balanced. However, as
we can see, the high-level nodes in this tree sometimes cut the
main region at busy spots, and thus a high volume of detection
messages may travel on long paths. This results in a high communication
cost of 1122.07.
Figure 7b shows the outcome of the coarse resolution DAB
run, where the resulting tree is not far from balanced while
high level tree nodes cut the main region mainly at spots with
small event rates. The communication cost is reduced to
814.78, while the height is 12, just slightly larger than that of
the fully balanced tree.
Figure 7c shows the outcome of the fine resolution DAB run,
where the resulting tree is both unbalanced and inefficient. The
communication cost is 1188.96 and the height is 22.
The plot in Figure 10 compares the communication cost of
the DAB method with that of a fully balanced tree for a 1D
sensor graph of 4096 sensors, with the number of DAB steps
varying between 1 and 10. The DAB tree has lower cost, but
the improvement in cost eventually diminishes, because introducing
additional small draining thresholds only affects a small
fraction of sensors.
Figure 11 shows the average and maximum tree heights
obtained for the same scenario. The height of DAB trees is
larger than the minimal, as expected; however, the maximum
height is not far from the average height, indicating a good
worst case delay. In particular, the tree construction avoids
building degenerate trees whose heights are proportional to the
number of sensors.
2) DAB Results for a 2D Sensor Graph
We evaluate the performance of the DAB tree construction
for 2D sensor graphs using the traffic pattern of Figure 8 generated
by the city mobility model. The light areas in the diagram
denote higher event rates, while darker areas denote areas of
less activity. As we can see, this scenario exhibits locality,
since most high activity regions are surrounded by the regions
of low activity.
Figure 9a shows an approximately balanced tree constructed
by using single-step DAB. Similar to the 1D case, all the nodes
are available for combining at once, and the combining process
does not take into account the mobility pattern information.
Figure 9b shows a tree constructed by four-step DAB. The
earlier steps combine higher cost nodes first, which end up
placed near the bottom of the tree. Similarly, the low cost
nodes take up the upper levels of the tree. For example, we can
see that the borders of the 2 top levels of the tree follow the
low-cost regions in the traffic pattern. Thus, only low-rate
detection messages end up traveling to the top 2 levels of the
tree. As a result, the DAB tree achieves a lower total communi-
The plots in Figures 12 and 13 compare the communication
cost and height, respectively, of the DAB constructed trees and
those of fully balanced trees for a 2D sensor graph with nodes
arranged in a 64x64 grid. The results are similar to those of the
1D case.