Given Fjord operators and sensor proxies as the main
elements of our solution, it is straightforward to generate
a Fjord from a user query over a sensor. For this discussion,
we will make the simple assumption that queries consist
of a set of selections to be applied, a list of join predicates,
and an optional aggregation and grouping expression.
We are not focused on a particular query language,
and believe Fjords are a useful architectural construct for
any query language – other research projects, such as Predator
and Tribeca, have proposed useful languages for querying
streaming data, which we believe are readily adaptable
to our architecture [22, 25]. We do not allow joins of two
streams nor can we aggregate or sort a stream. Users are
allowed to define windows on streams which can be sorted,
aggregated, or joined. A single stream can be joined with
a stream window or a fixed data source if it is treated as
the outer relation of an index join or the probe relation of
a hash-join. Users can optionally specify a sample rate for
sensors, which is used to determine the rate at which tuples
are delivered for the query.
Building the Fjord from such a query works as follows:
for each base relation, ifis a sensor, we locate the persistently
running sensor proxy for.We then install our query into
s proxy, asking it to deliver tuples at the user provided
sample rate and to apply any filters or aggregates which the
user has specified for the sensor stream. The proxy may
choose to fold those filters or aggregates into existing predicates
it has been asked to apply, or it may request that they
be managed by separate operators. For a relationthat does not 
represent a sensor, we create a new scan operator over. We then 
instantiate each selection operator, connecting it to a base 
relation scan or earlier selection operator as appropriate. If 
the base relation is a sensor, we connect the selection via a 
push-queue, meaning that the sensor will push results into the 
selection. For non-sensor relations, we use a pull queue, which 
will cause the selection to invoke the scan when it looks for a 
tuple on its input queue.We then connect join operators to these 
chains of scans and selects, performing joins in the order 
indicated by a standard static query optimizer. If neither of 
the joined relations represents a sensor, we choose the join 
method recommended by the optimizer. If one relation is a sensor, we
use it as the probe relation of a hash join, hashing into the
static relation as each stream tuple is pushed into the join.
The output of a join is a push queue if one relation is from
a sensor, and a pull queue otherwise.
Sorts and aggregates are placed at the top of the query
plan. In the case where one (or both) of the relations is
from a sensor with a user specified window size, we treat
it as a non-sensor relation by interposing a filter operator
above the sensor proxy that passes only those tuples in the
specified window.