1. INTRODUCTION
Ranking queries, also known as top-k queries, produce results that
are ordered on some computed score. A top-k query over defined
subsystems returns the objects with the k-highest aggregated
scores under a monotonic function. Rank-aware query processing
has become a vital need for many applications, especially in
modern large-scale distributed applications as top-k queries
enable fast, reliable and ad-hoc filtering of results. In this work,
we study the problem of answering top-k queries over p2p
networks under the general assumption that each peer maintains
its own ranked data. The naive solution to process a top-k query is
to ask all peers to send their scores to the query originator, which
merges all the results and returns the top-k ones. However, an
efficient top-k algorithm should return the highest k results by
limiting the messages transferred across peers, without examining
all scores in a fixed number of rounds.
Taking into account the p2p context and these characteristics we
seek efficient ways to answer global top-k queries that are issued
in the underlying network. We focus mainly on the promising
threshold-based techniques in order to retrieve the highest ranked
results. This family of algorithms promises standard phases of
termination which means limited transferred bytes and fast query
answering, exact matching of results, easy setup and use as soon
as peers have their data ranked according to the specified criteria.
However, to the best of our knowledge, these algorithms have not
been evaluated yet in p2p networks and it is not obvious whether
they can be effectively used. From this family of algorithms, we
take as a base a most promising algorithm called Hybrid
Threshold (HT) [1] and adapt it to a p2p network structured
according to a super-peer topology. The contributions of this
paper are threefold. First, it presents the evaluation of exact
threshold algorithms in large scale p2p networks with different
data distributions across nodes. Second, it presents two extended
versions of the HT algorithm which could be applied for peers
that host various kinds of data in any p2p network supporting a
super-peer topology for top-k query answering. Finally, the
results of this study provide useful conclusions regarding the
applicability of threshold techniques for current or future p2p data
management applications. More details about this work can be
found in [2]